Direct Instruction Mathematics (5th ed.), Stein, Kinder, Silbert & Carnine — Chapter: Symbol Identification and Place Value

Chapter
Symbol Identification 
and Place Value
LEARNING OUTCOMES
5.1 Discuss the relationship between numeral identification and place value and why 
place value is critical to mathematical understanding.
5.2 Explain the importance of introducing place value charts prior to introducing 
manipulatives when teaching place value concepts.
5.3 Describe the general teaching procedures for reading and writing numerals.
5.4 Explain how to teach students to read and write numerals beyond 20.
SKILL HIERARCHY
Symbol identification and place value are addressed together in this chapter because a numeral 
has a different value depending on the column in which it is placed. For example, 4 in 483 has 
the value of 400 but 4 in 64 has the value of 4. Symbol identification, especially reading and 
writing numerals accurately, along with a strong conceptual understanding of place value concepts prepares students for more advance computation and problem solving.
The Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart provides a recommended progression 
of skills that is designed to integrate critical place value concepts with numeral reading and 
writing skills. Numeral identification and the concept of numeral/object correspondence form 
the foundation of the Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart. Numeral/object one-to- 
one correspondence requires students to write the numeral that corresponds to the number of 
objects in a group or, conversely, draw a group of lines to show the number represented by a 
numeral.
Place value concepts are introduced through the following instructional activities: reading 
and writing tens, hundreds, thousands, and millions numerals; expanded notation; and column 
alignment. In reading multi-digit numerals, students translate each digit into a value according 
to its position and then identify the entire numeral. Writing numerals requires the reverse— 
breaking into parts rather than putting parts together.

40 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Expanded notation and column alignment are critical to reading and writing multi-digit 
numerals. Expanded notation problems with hundreds numerals involve rewriting a numeral by 
identifying its components:
342 = 300 + 40 + 2
When teachers see that students can read and write hundreds numerals, they then introduce 
column alignment problems with hundreds numerals:
342 + 8 is rewritten as 342
+8
The Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart lists specific skills, indicating their relative order of introduction. Note that many of the tasks in kindergarten and first grade require 
teachers to test students individually. In later grades, only tasks requiring students to read numerals need be tested individually.
........................... .............. -... ........ . . ............. — —
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
K Reading numerals zero through 10 Read these numerals: 4261 73085910
K Writing numerals zero through 10 Write these numerals: 426173085910
κ
κ
Writing members of set (lines) to represent a 
numeral
Writing a numeral to represent members 
of a set
4 6
III I I I I I I I
κ Reading teen numerals Read these numerals: 15 11 13 12 17 19 14 16 18
κ Writing teen numerals Write these numerals: 15 11 13 12 17 19 14 16 18
K-1 Reading numerals from 20 to 99 Read these numerals: 64 81 44 29
K-1 Writing numbers from 20 to 99 Write these numerals: 47 98 72 31
1 Column alignment:
Rewriting horizontal addition and 
subtraction problems
Rewrite the following problems vertically:
85 + 3 =_____
4 + 25 =_____
37 - 2 =_____
1 Expanded notation 63 =_____ +______
92 =_____ +______
2 Reading and writing numerals between 100 and 
999 except those with a zero in the tens column
Read: 320, 417, 521
Write seven hundred fifteen_____
Write four hundred thirty-six_____
Write three hundred fifty_____
2 Reading and writing numerals between 100 and 
999 with zero in tens column
Read: 502, 708, 303
Write four hundred eight_____
Write seven hundred two_____
Write three hundred three_____

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 41
2 Rewriting horizontal equations; one numeral is a 
hundreds numeral
305 + 8 + 42 =_____
428 - 21 =_____
31 + 142 + 8 =_____
2 Expanded notation with hundreds numerals 382 =_____ +______ +______
417 =_____ +______ +______
215 =_____ +______ +______
3 Reading and writing thousands numerals 
between 1,000 and 9,999 with no zeros in 
hundreds or tens column
Read: 3,248; 7,151; 1,318
Write five thousand three hundred fourteen_____
Write two thousand six hundred forty-three_____
Write one thousand one hundred forty-one_____
3 Reading and writing thousands numerals 
between 1,000 and 9,999 with a zero in the 
hundreds column
Read: 7,025; 8,014; 2,092
Write five thousand seventy-two_____
Write one thousand forty_____
Write six thousand eighty-eight_____
3 Reading and writing thousands numerals 
between 1,000 and 9,999 with zeros in the 
hundreds and/or tens columns
Read: 7,025; 2,002; 1,409
Write six thousand eight_____
Write nine thousand four_____
Write five thousand two_____
3 Column alignment:
Rewriting horizontal problems
35 + 1,083 + 245 =_____
4,035 - 23 =_____
8 + 2,835 =_____
4 Reading and writing all thousands numerals 
between 10,000 and 999,999
Read: 300,000
90,230
150,200
Write two hundred thousand_____
Write ninety thousand four hundred_____
Write one hundred thousand two hundred_____
4 Reading and writing numerals between 1 million 
and 9 million
Read: 6,030,000
5,002,100
1,340,000
Write seven million_____
Write three million, eighty thousand_____
Write eight million, six hundred thousand_____
5 Reading and writing numerals between 
10 million and 999 million
Read: 27,400,000
302,250,000
900,300,000
Write ten million_____
Write forty million two hundred thousand_____
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING «•••••••
In this chapter, we introduce reading and writing numerals using place value charts so that students can see how the numerals represent their respective values. These charts are used both by 
the teacher to introduce place value concepts and by the students as they practice independently. 
Once students have mastered these place value skills, the charts are no longer necessary but can 
be reintroduced when correcting errors.

42 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Although many commercial programs recommend introducing place value concepts using 
manipulatives, we recommend delaying the use of manipulatives until after students demonstrate their ability to read and write numerals using place value charts. The manipulatives used 
in this way provide students with further evidence of the value of the numeral and increase the 
chances that students are using the manipulatives correctly.
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: SYMBOL IDENTIFICATION ∙∙∙∙∙∙..
Format 5.1: 
Introducing New
Numerals
Watch how Michaela uses a clear 
point-and-touch signal along 
with individual turns to ensure 
all students are responding and 
have mastered the new numeral.
This section addresses skills typically taught during kindergarten and early first grade. These 
skills are prerequisites for the equality-based strategies that provide a conceptual understanding 
of addition and subtraction. The skills, listed in the order they are discussed in this section, are 
as follows:
1. Numeral identification (zero through 10)
2. Numeral writing (zero through 10)
3. Symbol identification and writing (+, —, =)
4. Equation reading and writing
5. Numeral/object correspondence
Numeral Identification
Numeral identification tasks usually begin when students can rote count at least to 10. The 
reason for delaying numeral identification is to avoid the potential confusion that could occur 
between counting and recognizing numerals. Students who enter school knowing how to count 
can begin learning to identify numerals immediately.
The sequence in which numerals are introduced is important. A basic guideline in sequencing the introduction of numerals is to separate similar-looking and similar-sounding numerals. 
Students are likely to confuse 6 and 9 because they look similar; likewise, students may have 
difficulty discriminating 4 and 5 because they sound alike, both beginning with the same sound. 
Therefore, a good sequence of introduction would separate both pairs of numerals by several 
lessons. One possible sequence for introducing numerals 0 to 10 is 4, 2, 6, 1, 7, 3, 0, 8, 5, 9, 10. 
Note the separation of 6 and 9; 1,0, and 10; and 4 and 5. This sequence is included as an example and is certainly not the only sequence that will minimize student errors.
A second sequencing guideline is to introduce new numerals cumulatively. A new numeral 
is not presented until students have demonstrated mastery of the previously introduced symbols. Teachers working with students who enter school with little or no previous knowledge of 
numerals can generally introduce new symbols at a rate of one new symbol each three to five 
lessons.
Format 5.1: Introducing New Numerals consists of a model in which the teacher points 
to the numeral and tells the students the name of the numeral; a test in which the teacher asks 
the students to identify the new numeral; and discrimination practice in which the teacher asks 
students to identify the new numeral and previously introduced numerals.
In this format, the teacher first writes a set of numerals on the board. Each of the previously 
introduced numerals is written once. The new numeral is written several times to ensure that 
the student attends to the appearance of the numeral rather than its position on the board. The 
most important part of the introduction is the discrimination practice in step 2 of the format.
Note that the presentation of the numeral follows an alternating pattern: new numeral, one previously introduced numeral, new numeral, two previously introduced numerals, new numeral, 
three previously introduced numerals, and so on. The time the student has to remember the new 
numeral is gradually increased by interspersing practice with more familiar numerals. This pattern is designed to help students better remember a new or difficult numeral. Individual turns are 
given after the teacher presents the discrimination practice. If, when given an individual turn, 
a student misidentifies or does not respond, the teacher models and tests the new numeral and 
uses the alternating pattern as a delayed test, focusing on that numeral and previously identified 
numerals.

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 43
FIGURE 5.1 Point and touch signal
A clear point-and-touch signal is essential for presentation of this format. The features of 
a good point-and-touch signal are illustrated in Figure 5.1. When signaling, the teacher points 
under the numeral (not touching the board), making sure that no student’s vision is blocked by 
any part of the teacher’s hand or body. After pointing under the numeral for 1 to 2 seconds, the 
teacher signals by moving her finger away from the board and then back toward it, touching 
under the numeral. The out-and-in motion is done crisply with the finger moving away from the 
board (about 6 inches) and then immediately moving back to the board. When the finger touches 
below the numeral, the students are to respond. The out-and-in motion should be done the same 
way every time it is used. Any hesitation or inconsistency makes unison responding difficult 
because the students cannot tell when they are supposed to answer.
As with rote counting, the numeral identification tasks are more efficiently taught if presented for 3 to 5 minutes at several different times during the lesson rather than in one long 
session. Numeral identification also can be practiced at various times of the day. Many teachers 
put the symbols on a bulletin board or wall in the room. The teachers then ask the students to 
identify the symbols during early morning exercises, before going to recess or lunch, or at other 
opportune times. The practice provided by these brief tasks, interspersed throughout the day, can 
make a great difference in how quickly low-performing students learn to identify symbols.
Numeral Writing
Numeral writing is an important skill in and of itself and also reinforces numeral identification. 
As a general rule, a new numeral can be introduced into numeral writing exercises several lessons after it first appears in a numeral identification format. As noted in numeral identification, 
symbols are introduced cumulatively. Instructionally naive students will be ready to practice 
writing a new numeral every three to five lessons. There are three basic stages in teaching students to write single-digit numerals:
1. Tracing numerals written on worksheets
2. Copying numerals
3. Writing numerals from dictation
For worksheet tracing exercises, we recommend that dots and dashes be used to prompt the 
students in writing the numerals.

44 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
During the first several lessons, the teacher leads the students through tracing, monitoring them quite carefully and, if necessary, moving the students’ hands to help them make the 
lines. The students say the name of the numeral each time they write it. When the students are 
able to trace a numeral without assistance, the teacher introduces copying. In initial copying 
exercises, dashed lines and dots appear for the first numeral but only dots for the remaining 
numerals.
When students can do this exercise, a more sophisticated copying exercise is introduced in 
which no dots or dashed lines are used as prompts. The students should practice writing each 
numeral many times each day for the first week the symbol is introduced. The number of repetitions can be gradually reduced as student performance improves.
The third and final stage of numeral writing includes numeral dictation exercises in which 
the teacher says a number and the students write the numeral. Some students find dictation exercises quite difficult in that they have to remember not only what a numeral looks like but also 
how to write it. The prerequisites for introducing a numeral in dictation exercises are being able 
to identify and copy the numeral.
In a numeral dictation exercise, the teacher follows the same alternating pattern used in 
numeral identification tasks. For example, if students have learned to write 4, 2, 6, 1 and are 
being introduced to 7 in a dictation exercise, the sequence of examples presented by the teacher 
might be 7, 4, 7, 6, 1, 7, 4, 2, 6, 7. The worksheet on which the students are to write the numerals 
should have blank spaces or boxes large enough to write each symbol.
Monitoring student writing is important when presenting numeral dictation exercises. The 
teacher should check the responses of all low-performing students after each numeral is written. The responses of higher-performing students can be checked after every second or third 
numeral. As soon as the last student has finished writing a symbol, if no mistakes were made, 
the teacher should dictate the next numeral. Too much time between tasks can result in off-task 
behavior.
Correcting Errors The correction procedure for errors involves a model-test-alternating pattern procedure. The teacher shows the students how to write the numeral, has the students copy 
it, and then alternates between having students write the missed numeral and other numerals, 
which serves as the delayed test.
Teachers must be careful in setting reasonable criteria for neatness. Students with little prior 
writing experience may require many months of practice before they consistently write numerals neatly. The teacher should gradually increase criteria for legibility and neatness. In initial 
exercises, writing a reasonable facsimile of a numeral is the critical student behavior. If a student writes a numeral backward, the teacher may respond by acknowledging that the correct 
numeral was written but address the positioning: “Good. That is a 4, but here’s how to write it.” 
Note that the correction is made in a positive manner.
Symbol Identification and Writing
The symbols for plus, minus, equal sign, and empty box are taught with the same procedures 
used for teaching numerals. An empty box can be introduced as “how many,” which facilitates 
reading equations; for example, 6 + 5 = □ is read: “Six plus five equals how many?”
Introduction of the various symbols should be interspersed throughout the lessons in 
which numerals are introduced. The first symbol would be introduced after several numerals; subsequent symbols would be introduced after two to three additional numerals had been 
introduced.
Equation Reading and Writing
Equation reading and writing are prerequisite skills for problem solving and learning math facts. 
Children may have difficulty reading a problem such as 6 — 3 = □, even though they can identify each symbol in isolation. When they read a problem, they must connect the numerals and 
symbols together. Reading and writing number sentences requires considerable practice.
Equation reading is introduced when the students can identify numerals and symbols accurately and fluently. If students have not received adequate practice to quickly identify numerals 
when they appear in isolation, they will have much difficulty reading equations.

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 45
Because the procedure for teaching the reading of equations is quite straightforward, a format is not included. The teacher simply writes several equations on the board and follows a 
model-lead-test-delayed test procedure:
4 + 3 = □ 7 - 3 = □
The teacher models reading the first equation at a rate of about a numeral or symbol 
each second. Reading at a faster rate should be avoided initially, since it may encourage 
guessing. The teacher then leads by responding with the students as they read the statement. 
Lower-performing students may need 10 or more repetitions. When the students can read the 
statement by themselves, the teacher tests the group and then individuals. The teacher gives a 
delayed test using previously introduced examples before introducing subsequent statements.
Equation reading is practiced daily for several weeks. It can be discontinued when addition 
is introduced, since the addition formats begin with the students reading an equation.
Equation writing requires students to write equations dictated by the teacher; for example, 
“Listen: Four plus three equals how many? Say that. . . Write it.” Equation writing is introduced 
when the students can read equations with relative ease and are fluent in writing numerals and 
symbols during dictation exercises.
Format 5.2: Equation Writing involves the students repeating a statement at a normal 
rate, then repeating the statement at a slow rate, and finally writing the statement. The purpose 
of having students say the statement slowly is to help young students who write slowly remember the latter part of the statement as they are writing the earlier part.
Correcting Errors A common error is writing a numeral or symbol out of order. As soon as 
the teacher notices an error in a written equation, she points to each symbol while saying the 
correct statement. For example, if a student writes 6 + □ = 2 for 6 + 2 = □, the teacher says 
“6” and points to 6; says “plus” and points to +; says “2” and points to the box that the student 
has written. The teacher immediately says, “This is not 2. Let’s try the problem again.” The 
teacher has the student cross out or erase the problem, then repeats the equation, has the student 
say the equation, and then has the student write the equation. The teacher provides a delayed test 
by dictating similar equations or returning to the missed equation at a later time.
Numeral/Object Correspondence
This section includes two types of one-to-one correspondence tasks. In the first task, the student identifies a symbol and then writes the appropriate number of lines; for example, the student identifies the numeral 2 and then draws two lines under the 2. For the second, the student 
counts the number of lines or other objects and writes the numeral that represents the number of 
objects; for the task below, the student writes a 2 in the box.
Both tasks are component skills for the equality-based strategies students are taught to solve 
addition and subtraction in which they write and count lines. Therefore, these tasks should be 
taught relatively early in the instructional sequence. Both one-to-one correspondence skills can 
be introduced within a short period of time, since they usually are easy for students to learn. As 
soon as the students learn to identify a new numeral, teachers should incorporate it into these 
tasks.
Identifying a Number and Drawing Lines Prior to introducing tasks in which the 
students draw lines to correspond to a numeral, the teacher may need to provide practice for 
lower-performing students in simply drawing lines. The teacher gives students a piece of paper 
with a series of dots about 1 /4 inch apart and 1/2 inch above a horizontal line. The teacher then 
models how to draw Unes. This initial exercise is followed by an exercise in which students write 
a line each time the teacher claps.

46 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Students may write crooked lines or crowd them together—for instance, ∖ΛV∖. Either 
error may cause overlapping or crossed lines, which makes accurate counting difficult. The 
teacher should carefully monitor and correct by modeling and then, if necessary, guiding the 
student’s pencil as the student makes the lines. When students can draw lines as the teacher 
claps, the teacher introduces an exercise in which the students also count as they draw lines. 
When the students can count and draw lines as the teacher claps, exercises with numerals can 
be introduced.
Format 5.3: Identifying a Symbol and Drawing Lines teaches students to draw lines 
for numerals. In the format, students first identify a numeral, state that the numeral tells them 
to draw a certain number of lines, and then draw the lines. Since most students readily learn 
this skill, they require only two to four lessons before teachers can include this type of task on 
independent worksheets. Note that a how-many box is included as an example in the teacher 
presentation because students must understand that not every symbol tells them to draw lines.
If students make errors on independent worksheet items, the teacher should test them to 
determine the cause of the error. Did the student identify the numeral correctly? If not, the misidentification caused the error. If the student identified the numeral correctly, the error resulted 
from a line drawing error, which is corrected by reviewing Format 5.3.
Counting Objects and Writing a Numeral Writing a numeral to represent a set of objects 
is an integral part of the conceptual strategy we recommend for teaching addition. This strategy 
involves drawing lines for each addend, counting all of the lines, drawing that number of lines 
under the box on the other side of the equals, and finally writing the numeral for those lines 
(the sum) in the box (see below). Note that a more detailed explanation of this initial strategy 
designed to teach conceptual understanding of addition is provided in Chapter 7.
£ Format 5.4:
Writing a Numeral 
for a Set of Objects 
Watch how Tristan closely 
monitors his students.
4 + 2 = 6
Illi II Hill
Format 5.4: Writing a Numeral for a Set of Objects begins with an explanation of the 
function of the objects under a box: “The objects under a box tell what numeral goes in the box.” 
The students are then told to count the objects under the box and write the numeral for the number they end up with. If students have mastered the necessary preskills of rational counting and 
numeral writing, they will have little difficulty. After practicing this skill in two or three lessons, 
tasks of this kind can be included on worksheets as independent activities.
The two mistakes students might make on this task are miscounting the objects and writing 
the wrong numeral. Often it is not clear by looking at a worksheet how a student derived an 
answer. In this case, the teacher should ask the student to work several items while counting 
aloud so that the cause of the error can be identified and an appropriate correction provided. If 
the student cannot correctly count objects in several problems, the teacher should provide practice on object counting (see Chapter 4). If a student writes the wrong numeral, the teacher needs 
to provide practice in numeral identification and numeral dictation. Mistakes involving mechanics such as writing a numeral backward are not critical. However, the teacher should have the 
student rewrite the backward numeral. As mentioned earlier, some students need months of 
practice writing numerals before they consistently write them in the correct form.
Practice and Review
Once students are proficient with drawing lines for a symbol and writing a numeral for a group 
of objects, the tasks may be extended to similar tasks using manipulatives. For example, rather 
than drawing Unes for a symbol, students may be provided with counters or other objects. They 
place the appropriate number of objects in a space below or next to each numeral. Students can 
work in pairs to check one another’s work by reading each numeral and counting the corresponding objects.
A large display can also be provided at a workstation with numerals and an empty box 
below each numeral. A variety of objects could be made available with the display (10 each of 
pencils, identical plastic toys, blocks, etc.). Students can create sets of objects for each numeral, 

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 47
placing the correct number of similar objects in each box. Other students then can check the sets 
and create different sets for each numeral. The purpose of these types of activities is to provide 
additional independent practice opportunities.
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: PLACE VALUE ∙∙∙∙**..
Three skills related to place value discussed in this section are: (1) reading and writing numerals, 
(2) expanded notation, and (3) column alignment. The teaching procedures discussed for reading 
and writing numerals address the following: teens, tens, hundreds, thousands, and millions. The 
teaching procedures are quite similar for reading and writing numerals. In reading numerals, the 
students identify the numerals in each column (two tens and four ones) and their value (two tens 
equal 20) and then combine the values to read the entire numeral (20 and 4 = 24). In writing 
numerals, students first expand the number into its component parts (24 = two tens and four 
ones) and then write each component.
Variations in the teaching procedures are needed with teen numerals and numerals with 
zero. With teen numerals, students say the ones number first (16 is read “sixteen,” not “teensix”) 
but write the tens numeral first (in writing 16, students write the 1, then the 6). Numerals with 
zeros are difficult because students must omit the zeros when reading (306 is read “three hundred six,” not “three hundred zero six”) but include them when writing, even though the students 
don’t hear them. Instructions in reading and writing numerals should be carefully coordinated. 
Students should be introduced to numeral identification first and then to numeral writing for 
those types of numerals.
Reading and Writing Teen Numerals
Reading Teen Numerals Reading teen numerals is introduced when the students can read 
all numerals between zero and 10. Regular teens are introduced before irregular teens. The 
numerals 14, 16, 17, 18, and 19 are regular teens. The irregular teens are 11, 12, 13, and 15. Note 
that 14 is regular because it is pronounced fourteen. But 12 is not pronounced Λt^teen, and 15 is 
not pronounced fiveteen, so they are considered irregular.
Format 5.5: Reading Teen Numerals Using Place Value Concepts is constructed in three 
parts. In Part A, a structured board exercise, the teacher makes a chart on the board with spaces 
for the tens and ones columns. The teacher tells the students that they read one 10 as “teen” 
and models reading teen numerals. Then the students read them. On the first day of instruction, 
examples are limited to regular teen numerals: 14, 16, 17, 18, and 19. The next day, one irregular teen is introduced. A new irregular teen is introduced each day unless students have difficulty 
with previously introduced teens. When a new irregular teen is introduced, the teacher alternates 
between the new numeral and previously introduced numerals (13, 14, 13, 16, 18, 13, 17, 14, 19, 13) 
to provide practice and facilitate retention.
Part B is a less structured exercise in which the students read teen numerals without prompting. Part B is presented daily for several weeks. Part C is a worksheet exercise designed to 
emphasize place value concepts. In Part C, the students are shown pictures of counters and 
instructed to circle the appropriate numeral. After writing teen numerals has been introduced, 
students can write the appropriate numeral rather than circle it.
Writing Teen Numerals Writing teen numerals is introduced when students can read teen 
numerals accurately and fluently. As in the procedure for reading teen numerals, regular teen 
numerals (14, 16, 17, 18, and 19) are introduced first, then irregular teen numerals (11, 12, 13, 
and 15). Irregular teens can be introduced about two days after regular teens. If students have no 
or little difficulty, a new irregular teen can be taught each day.
Format 5.6: Writing Teen Numerals Using Place Value Concepts has four parts. Part A, 
a preskill, contains a model-test procedure for teaching students to tell the component parts of 
a teen numeral: 14 equals a 1 for the teen (10) and a 4. Part B is a structured board presentation. 
The teacher refers to the place value chart on the board and writes the digits in the appropriate 
columns. Part C is a structured worksheet exercise in which the teacher prompts the students as

48 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
they write numerals. Part D is an independent dictation exercise in which the teacher says teen 
numbers and the students write them. If students are able to read the words fluently, the dictation 
exercise can be replaced with a written worksheet in which students write the numerals indicated by written words.
Practice in writing teen numerals is continued daily for several weeks to facilitate mastery. 
The place value chart is included in writing exercises only for the first several weeks and then 
dropped.
Practice and Review
The worksheet exercise in Figure 5.2 contains pictures of a group of 10 objects and several 
single objects. The students are to fill in numerals in the tens and ones columns. This exercise, 
which reinforces the place value concept, can be introduced after students become proficient in 
writing dictated numerals.
Additional worksheets to reinforce place value may include pictures of groups of common 
objects, such as a bundle of pencils, a box of 10 crayons, and single objects. Finally, students 
can be presented with groups of manipulative objects—for instance, a bundle of 10 toothpicks 
with six single toothpicks, a bouquet of 10 flowers and individual flowers—or, if students know 
the value of dimes and pennies, a dime and nine pennies. Students write the teen numeral for 
each example.
Reading and Writing Tens Numerals
Reading Numerals 20-99 Reading numerals from 20 through 99 is introduced when 
students can read teen numerals accurately and fluently. Students also should be able to count 
by ones and skip count by tens to 100 (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100). Format 5.7: 
Reading Tens Numerals Using Place Value Concepts is designed to teach students to read 
numerals between 20 and 99.
Parts A and B utilize piles of 10 blocks to emphasize the place value concept for tens numbers. In Part A, the teacher draws several sets of 10 blocks. The teacher then has the students 
count by tens to figure out the total number of blocks and verifies the tens place value (five tens 
equal 50).
In Part B, the teacher uses a model-test procedure to facilitate memorization of the various 
place value facts for tens numbers. Some students can be expected to have difficulty with translating two tens, three tens, and five tens, since the names for these numbers are irregular. While 
four tens equal forty and eight tens equal eighty, two tens do not equal “twoty.”
Parts C and D involve reading numerals in the place value chart. In Part C, the teacher 
instructs students to start reading in the tens column. She asks students to identify the numeral in 
the tens column and its value. Finally, the teacher asks students to read the entire numeral.

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 49
In Part D, students read numerals with no prompting from the teacher. If students have a 
lot of difficulty with Part D, they may have transitioned too quickly from Part C to Part D. The 
teacher should return to the structured board presentation and provide additional practice. When 
students demonstrate mastery, the teacher can continue to the less structured format in Part D. 
When students can correctly identify the numerals using a place value chart, the teacher should 
eliminate the prompt of the chart and have students read numerals without it. About a fourth 
of the examples in Part D should be teen numerals to provide the appropriate discrimination 
practice.
In Part E, the student is to select the numeral that represents a group of blocks. The worksheet shows diagrams with sets of 10 and individual blocks. The students determine the total by 
first counting the piles of 10. Then they figure out what number the groups of 10 equal (three 
tens equal 30). Finally, they count the single blocks, starting with the tens number they ended 
with (31, 32, 33, 34), which requires that students have mastered the preskill of counting from 
different numbers.
Writing Numerals 20-99 Writing numerals for 20 through 99 is introduced after students 
can read these numerals. The procedures for teaching students to write these numerals appear in 
Format 5.8: Writing Tens Numerals Using Place Value Concepts. Parts A and B are preskills. 
Part A teaches the student to say the composite parts of the numeral (97 is 90 and 7). Part B 
teaches the students to tell how many tens in a tens number (50 is five tens). Part C introduces 
writing numerals from 20 through 99 using a place value chart. The teacher says a number and 
has the students say its component parts. For example, the teacher asks how many tens in 84 and 
writes 8 in the tens column. The teacher then says, “Eighty equals 8 tens. Listen: 84 equals 80 
and what else?” After the students say “4,” the teacher writes the 4 in the ones column. Part D 
has the same steps as Paid C, except the students write the numerals. Part E is a dictation exercise. The teacher dictates numbers, and the students write the appropriate numerals in the place 
value chart.
About a third of the examples in Part D should be teen numbers. As with reading numerals, if students make frequent mistakes with the less structured exercise, they have moved too 
quickly from the prompted to the unprompted task. The teacher should then return to the structured board presentation (Part C) before returning to Part D. When students respond confidently 
to several consecutive examples in Part D, the teacher then can present the dictation exercise in 
Part E.
Teachers working with struggling students can expect these students to have reversal problems, specifically with numerals ending in 1. For example, students may write 31 as 13, 71 as 
17, or 21 as 12. To remedy these reversal problems, the teacher presents Parts B, C, and D from 
Format 5.6: Writing Teen Numerals Using Place Value Concepts for one or two lessons concurrently with Format 5.8: Writing Tens Numerals Using Place Value Concepts, excluding 
all tens numerals ending with 1 (21, 31, 41, 51). The purpose of excluding those tens numerals 
is to ensure that students master the easier numerals before reintroducing numerals that students 
have reversed.
After the students write teen and tens numerals without assistance for several days, 
the teacher can begin working directly on the reversal problem. She would return to Part E 
of Format 5.8: Writing Tens Numerals Using Place Value Concepts but include minimally 
different examples, focusing on the discrimination between tens and teen numerals like 13 and 
31, 17 and 71. Part E may have to be reviewed daily for several weeks for students who are confused. Note that minimally different pairs are used only for struggling students, not for younger 
students learning the skill for the first time.
Reading and Writing Hundreds Numerals
Reading Numerals 100-999 Reading hundreds numerals is usually taught during second 
grade. Students should be able to read and write numerals for numbers below 100 prior to 
the introduction of numerals from 100 to 999. The teaching procedure is very similar to that 
used for teaching students to read tens numerals. The procedures for reading hundreds appear 
in Format 5.9: Reading Hundreds Numerals Using Place Value Concepts. In Part A, the

50 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Circle the correct numeral:
FIGURE 5.3 Worksheet exercise for reading hundreds numerals
three hundred sixty-two 320 362 360
four hundred eighty-six 48 468 486
two hundred seventy-one 217 270 271
nine hundred thirty-two 732 932 923
teacher introduces the hundreds column using a place value chart, explaining that numerals 
in that column tell how many hundreds. The teacher then leads students in reading numerals. 
He points to the digit farthest to the left, asks what column it is in, and then asks what number 
the digit represents: “What column does this numeral start in?. . . How many hundreds do we 
have?. . . What do five hundreds equal?” The teacher then does the same for each remaining 
digit in the numeral. “How many tens do we have?. . . What do four tens equal?. . . How many 
ones do we have?. . . What do eight ones equal?” A slight modification of the basic procedure is 
used for numerals with a 1 in the tens column. This modification involving a prompt appears at 
the end of Part A of Format 5.9. In Part B, the students read the numerals without that prompt.
Daily exercises in reading numerals are continued for several weeks. Thereafter, practice in 
reading numerals is incorporated into the formats for teaching computation strategies in which 
the first step always involves reading the problem. Practice also can be provided through worksheet exercises like that in Figure 5.3 where students read numerical words and then circle the 
correct numeral. Obviously, such written exercises are appropriate only for students who can 
decode the words.
The sequence in which hundreds numerals are introduced is important. Hundreds numerals 
that do not include a zero in the tens column should be introduced first. Numerals with a zero in 
the tens column are difficult because the student says nothing for the zero. These more difficult 
examples would be introduced in Part A about a week after introducing the easier numerals. A 
slight modification to the format is required. In step 3 of Part A, the teacher would say, “We 
have zero tens, so we don’t say anything when I point to the numeral zero.” For example, for 
608, students say “600” when the teacher points to 6, remain quiet when the teacher points to 0, 
and then say “8” when the teacher points to 8.
When presenting exercises to teach students to read hundreds numerals with a zero in the 
tens column, the teacher would include several sets of examples like these: 38, 308, 380; 42, 
420, 402; 703, 730, 73. Note that each set contains three minimally different numerals: a tens 
numeral and two hundreds numerals. The hundreds numerals include the same digits that appear 
in the tens numeral plus a zero. In one of the hundreds numerals, the zero appears in the tens column, and in the other hundreds numeral, the zero appears in the ones column. Minimally different examples, such as those above, are introduced only after students have been systematically 
taught to read hundreds numerals with zeros. Students who correctly read minimally different 
sets of examples have demonstrated mastery of this skill.
Writing Numerals 100-999 Students usually have more difficulty learning to write hundreds numerals than to read them. The sequence in which hundreds numerals are introduced 
in writing tasks is the same sequence recommended for reading numerals. We recommend that 
hundreds numerals be introduced in two stages. During the first stage, hundreds numerals with 
a zero in the tens column should be excluded; 248 would be acceptable, but 208 would not be. 
Two hundred eight is troublesome because no tens number is heard. During the second stage, 
numerals with a zero in either the tens or the ones column may be used.
Format 5.10: Writing Hundreds Numerals Using Place Value Concepts includes the 
procedures for teaching students to write hundreds numerals without a zero in the tens column. 
In Part A, the teacher guides the students in writing numerals for numbers through 999. For 
example, for writing 486, the teacher asks students to say the first part of the number (400) and 
points out that since it’s a hundreds number, they are to start writing the numeral in the hundreds column. The teacher asks how many hundreds and has the students write the numeral (4) 
in the hundreds column. The teacher then asks what column comes next (tens). This question 

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 51
is designed to remind students that they must always write a numeral in the tens column. The 
teacher has the students say the tens number (80), asks how many tens in that number (8), and 
has the students write that numeral (8) in the tens column. The ones column is completed next. 
The students write 6 in that column.
Part B is a supervised practice exercise in which numbers are written as words and students 
must write the numerals. Teachers working with students struggling with decoding may read the 
words to the students. Daily practice continues for several weeks. A place value chart is incorporated into exercises for the first several weeks and then should be eliminated.
Note that several tens numbers are included in Part B to reinforce the concept of proper column alignment. The first digit in a tens number is written in the tens column, while the first digit 
in a hundreds number is written in the hundreds column.
Hundreds numbers with a zero in the tens column are introduced in writing exercises after 
students can accurately write three-digit numerals without a zero in the tens column. For numbers with a zero in the tens or ones column, step 3 in Pail A of Format 5.10 must be modified. 
For example, after the students indicate that they do not hear a tens number, the teacher asks, 
“So what do we write in the tens column?” “Zero.” “Write a zero in the tens column.” The 
teacher then proceeds to step 4.
Examples would be the same as for exercises focusing on reading numerals with a zero in 
the tens column; minimally different sets such as 902, 92, 920; 48, 480, 408; and 702, 72, 720 
should be used. Note that for the tens numbers, once students identify the tens column as the 
column they start writing in (step 2), they can simply write the numeral.
Reading and Writing Thousands Numerals
Reading Numerals 1,000-9,999 Thousands numerals are usually introduced during third 
grade. Format 5.11: Reading Thousands Numerals Using Place Value Concepts introducing 
students to reading thousands numerals is fairly simple. Students are taught that the numeral in 
front of the comma tells how many thousands. They read that numeral, say “thousand” for the 
comma, and then read the rest of the numeral. For example, in reading 3,286, students say “3,” 
then “thousand” for the comma, and finally “286.”
Students should practice reading 8 to 10 numerals in this format. The sequence in which 
thousands numerals are introduced should be carefully designed. We recommend that thousands 
numerals be introduced in this sequence:
1. Numerals between 1,000 and 9,999 without zeros in the tens or hundreds column
2. Numerals between 1,000 and 9,999 that have zeros in the tens and/or hundreds column
3. Numerals between 10,000 and 99,999
4. Numerals between 100,000 and 999,999
We recommend not including numerals with zeros in the tens or hundreds column initially, 
since students may mistakenly develop the misrule that thousands have something to do with the 
number of zeros in a numeral rather than the number of places. When numerals with zeros are 
introduced, the teacher should pay careful attention to example selection. A fourth of the numerals should have a zero in the hundreds and a zero in the tens columns, a fourth should have a 
zero in just the hundreds column, another fourth should have a zero in just the tens column, and 
a final fourth should have no zeros at all. A sample set of examples might include 2,000, 2,058, 
2,508, 2,815; 7,002, 7,020, 7,200, 7,248; and 9,040, 9,400, 9,004, 9,246.
During fourth grade, students should be introduced to thousands numerals between 1,000 
and 9,999 that do not have a comma because some reference materials that students encounter 
will have thousands numerals written without a comma. In presenting thousands numerals without a comma, the teacher tells the students that when a numeral has four digits, it is a thousands 
numeral and then presents a list that includes a mix of thousands and hundreds numerals.
Writing Numerals 1,000-9,999 We recommend teaching writing thousands in the same 
sequence as identified previously for teaching reading thousands. Because teaching writing 
thousands is very similar to teaching writing hundreds, we do not include a separate format. 
Please see Format 5.10: Writing Hundreds Numerals Using Place Value Concepts for those 

52 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
teaching procedures. The only change needed to that format is adding a thousands column in 
the place value chart and adjusting examples accordingly. Note that initially, all numerals in 
the teaching examples would have a digit other than zero in the hundreds and tens columns. 
Subsequently, numerals with a zero in the hundreds column and/or the tens column would be 
introduced.
Numerals with a zero in the hundreds column are difficult because students may omit 
the zero. Students often will write the numeral four thousand eighty-five as the numbers they 
hear: four thousand, eighty, and five (4, 85). The teaching procedure for writing numerals 
must be designed to reinforce the place value concept of writing digits in each of the thousands, hundreds, tens, and ones columns. Writing numerals with a zero in the hundreds or 
tens column may be introduced about a week after the easier examples are taught. Just as 
with reading thousands numerals, sets of minimally different examples should be presented 
in numeral writing exercises: 4,028, 4,208, 4,218, 4,280; 6,200, 6,002, 6,020, 6,224; 5,090, 
5,900, 5,009, 5,994.
Practice in writing thousands numerals should be continued daily for several weeks. Practice can be provided through worksheet exercises similar to those in Figure 5.3 for reading hundreds. Students read number words and then write the appropriate numerals.
Reading and Writing Millions Numerals
Millions numerals are usually taught during late fourth grade and early fifth grade. Reading millions can be taught using a procedure similar to that used for reading thousands. The 
teacher instructs students to identify millions by examining the number of commas in the 
numeral. Students are taught that when two commas appear, the numerals in front of the first 
comma signify millions, while the numerals in front of the second comma signify thousands. 
The teacher initially prompts students by having them say the number a part at a time. See 
Summary Box 5.1.
Example selection for reading millions numerals should include a mix of millions numerals 
and thousands numerals so that the students receive practice in discriminating what to do when 
there are two commas instead one comma. Writing millions numerals is taught by using a blank 
line for each digit in the number and placing the two commas correctly for students:
The teacher leads the students through writing the numerals, focusing on each comma as she did 
when teaching reading millions. “Listen. 5 million, 203 thousand, 450. How many million?. . . 
Write 5 in the millions space before the millions comma. . . 5 million, 203 thousand. How 
many thousands?. . . Write 203 in the spaces before the thousands comma . . . Listen. 5 million, 
203 thousand, 450. Write the rest of the numeral.”
Numerals with zeros in either the hundred thousands, the ten thousands, or the thousands, 
such as 3,064,800; 2,005,000; or 8,000,124; are especially difficult for students to write. These 
numerals are introduced in writing exercises only after the students can write easier numerals and can read millions numerals. Again, as with thousands numerals, minimally different 
sets should be used (6,024,000; 6,204,000; 6,024; 6,240,000; 6,240). The sets should include a 
'summary . BOX 5.1
Symbol Identification: Reading Millions
1. Teacher asks students to identify how many commas are in the numeral.
2. Teacher asks what the numeral in front of the first comma tells about and has students identify 
that numeral.
3. Teacher asks what the numerals in front of the second comma tell about and has students identify 
that numeral.
4. Teacher asks students to identify the entire numeral.

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 53
mixture of millions and thousands numerals. Multiple practice opportunities to read and write 
millions numerals are necessary in order for students to develop mastery. This practice should 
be provided through oral and worksheet exercises over a period of several months.
Expanded Notation
Expanded notation involves rewriting a numeral as an addition problem composed of 
the numerals that each digit represents. For example, the numeral 3,428 is rewritten as 
3,000 + 400 + 20 + 8, or vertically as:
3,000
400
20
+ 8
g‰ Format 5.12 A/B: 
Expanded Notation
Watch how Tristan introduces 
expanded notation.
The sequence in which expanded notation problems are introduced parallels the sequence 
in which students are taught to read and write numerals: teens, hundreds, thousands, then 
millions.
The initial teaching procedure for expanded notation is included in Part A of Format 5.12: 
Expanded Notation. The teacher has students identify the number they hear in each place. 
For example, the teacher asks, “Do you hear a hundreds number in 362? What hundreds 
number? Do you hear a tens number in 362? What tens number? Do you hear a ones number in 362? What ones number?” After students can accurately identify the values for a complex number, they should have relatively little trouble saying a number as an addition problem 
(362 = 300 + 60 + 2), which is the focus of Part B. In Part C, students practice writing the 
numerals as addition problems. Finally, in Part D, students are given independent worksheet 
problems for which they apply their expanded notation skills.
Column Alignment
Column alignment involves writing a series of numerals so that the appropriate digits are vertically aligned. Column alignment is important because it is a prerequisite for advanced computation and for solving word problems in which the numerals do not appear in a column. For 
example, “Pearl has 4,037 marbles. She gives 382 marbles to her younger brother. How many 
does she have left?” Column alignment exercises also test students’ understanding of place 
value. For example, students who try to solve the word problem about Pearl’s marbles by writing the problem as:
4,037 
- 382
not only will arrive at the wrong answer but also will have demonstrated that they do not have a 
clear understanding of place value.
Column alignment tasks usually involve numerals with different numbers of digits written 
as horizontal problems. The complexity of these column alignment tasks increases as the number of digits increases. Initially, exercises should involve adding tens numbers and ones numbers (32 + 5 + 14); later, hundreds, tens, and ones (142 + 8 + 34); then thousands, hundreds, 
tens, and ones (3,042 + 6 + 134 + 28).
The strategy we recommend to teach column alignment involves teaching students to rearrange the order of the numerals. The numeral with the most digits is written first, and the other 
numerals are written underneath. The purpose of writing the largest numeral first is to establish 
the columns. Format 5.13: Teaching Column Alignment involves a simple model-test procedure in a structured worksheet format. The teacher introduces students to the rule about writing 
the numeral with the most digits first and then guides the students in determining which column 
to begin writing the other numerals. The structured worksheet exercise is presented for several 
lessons. Thereafter, practice on about five problems daily should be given on independent worksheets for several weeks.

54 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. The numerals below are representative of various types. Tell the type each numeral illustrates. List 
the order in which the types would be introduced.
836; 13; 18; 305; 64; 5,024; 5,321
2. Two teachers are introducing reading hundreds numerals. Below are the examples each included in 
their lessons. Which set is more appropriate? Tell why.
Teacher A: 306, 285, 532, 683, 504
Teacher B: 724, 836, 564, 832, 138
3. Explain the importance of introducing place value charts prior to introducing manipulatives when 
teaching place value concepts.
4. Construct a set of six to eight examples to be used in presenting Format 5.11: Reading Thousands 
Numerals Using Place Value Concepts, Part B, including zeros in the hundreds and/or tens column.
5. The teacher is presenting a task in which the numerals 4, 2, and 5 appear. When the teacher points to 
4 and asks, “What numeral?” a student says, “5.” What is the correction procedure?
6. A student writes a 7 in an empty box over a group of five Unes. Tell two possible causes of this error. 
How could you determine the exact cause? Describe the correction procedure.
7. During a test of writing numerals, a student writes a 2 as a 5. What should the teacher do?
8. Below is a worksheet item done independently by a student. The item required the student to write 
the appropriate number of lines to represent a numeral. Note the errors made by the student and 
describe the probable cause. Describe the correction procedure.
m ∣≡ m 000
ιι ιιιι ιιιιιι ιιιιι m mini
9. When reading numerals, a student identifies 71 as 17. What is the correction procedure?
10. During the supervised practice for writing hundreds numerals, students make frequent errors (some 
students write 38 for three hundred eight). How should the teacher respond to these errors?
Format 5.1
INTRODUCING NEW NUMERALS (See Video)
TEACHER STUDENTS
Note: This format is used with each new symbol. In this example, we assume 
that the numerals 1, 4, 6, and 2 have been introduced and that the numeral 
7 is being introduced.
(Write the following numerals on the board.)
7 2
4 6 7
7 1

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 55
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Model and test. Point to 7.)
1. This is a seven. What is this? (Touch 7.)
(Discrimination practice.)
2. When I touch it, tell me what it is. (Point to 2, pause a second.)
What numeral? (Touch 2.)
(Repeat step 3 with these numerals: 7, 1, 6, 1, 7, 2, 1, 6, 7, etc.)
3. (Individual turns: Ask individual students to identify several numerals.)
7
2
Format 5.2
EQUATION WRITING
4 + 5 = □; 7 - 2 = □ J
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Give students paper and pencil.)
1. You are going to write an equation. First you'll say it. Listen: Six plus 
two equals how many? Listen again. Six plus two equals how many? 
Say that.
To correct: Respond with students until they can say the statement at 
the normal rate of speech.
2. Now we'll say it the slow way. Every time I dap, we'll say a part of the 
statement. (Respond with the students.) Get ready. (Clap.) Six
(Pause 2 seconds; clap.) plus
(Pause 2 seconds; clap.) two
(Pause 2 seconds; clap.) equals
(Pause 2 seconds; clap.) how many?
(Repeat step 2 until students appear able to respond on their own.)
3. Now I'll dap and you say the statement by yourselves.
(Pause.) Get ready. (Clap at 2-second intervals.)
4. Now write the problem.
5. (Repeat steps 1-5 with three more equations, e.g., 8 - 3 = □;
Six plus two equals how 
many?
Six
plus
two
equals
how many?
Six plus two equals how 
many?
Students write 6 + 2 = □
Format 5.3
IDENTIFYING A SYMBOL AND THEN DRAWING LINES
TEACHER STUDENTS
4 6 □ 2
1. Everybody touch the first numeral on your worksheet. (Hold up worksheet and 
point to 4.)
What is it? 4
continued

56 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 5.3 (continued)
IDENTIFYING A SYMBOL AND THEN DRAWING LINES
TEACHER STUDENTS
A 4 tells you to make four lines. What does a 4 tell you to do? Make 4 lines.
Each time 1 clap, draw a line and count.
(Signal by clapping once each 2 seconds.)
1, 2, 3, 4
How many did you end up with?
Yes, 4.
4
2. Touch the next symbol. What is it? 6
A 6 tells you to make six lines. What does a 6 tell you to do? Make 6 lines.
Each time 1 clap, draw a line and count.
(Signal by clapping once each two seconds.)
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
How many did you end up with?
Yes, 6.
6
3. Touch the next symbol. What is it?
Does a box tell you to draw lines? No. A box does not tell you to draw lines.
box
Does a box tell you to draw lines? no
So are you going to draw lines? no
4. Touch the next symbol. What is it? 2
What does 2 tell you to do?
Do it.
Get ready to count the lines. Get ready. (Signal by clapping once each
Make two lines.
2 seconds.) 1, 2
How many did you end up with?
(On subsequent days use step 4 wording to provide additional examples.)
2
Format 5.4
WRITING A NUMERAL FOR A SET OF OBJECTS (See Video)
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Give students a worksheet similar to the one above.)

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 57
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. Everybody, here's a rule: The objects under a box tell what numeral goes in the 
box. Get ready to count the objects under this box. (Point to the first set of objects 
on the worksheet and pause while the students point to the first line.) Count as I 
clap. Get ready. (Clap each second.)
How many objects are under this box?
So what numeral are you going to write in the box?
Write that numeral.
2. (Repeat step 1 for additional examples.)
1, 2, 3
3
3
Format 5.5
READING TEEN NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
(Write the following chart on the board.)
tens ones
1 4
1__________ 6
1__________ 7
1__________ 8
1 9
1. (Point to the tens column.) This is the tens column. (Point to the ones 
column.) This is the ones column.
2. These numerals all start with one ten. When we have one ten in the 
tens column, we say teen. Listen to me read the numerals. (Point to 14)
14 (Point to 16) 16 (Point to 17) 17 (Point to 18) 18 (Point to 19) 19
3. Your turn to read these numerals. (Point to numerals in random order as 
students read.)
4. (Give individual turns to several students to read two numerals.)
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write 14 on the board. Point to 14.) What numeral? 14
2. (Repeat step 1 with 19, 17, 18, 16.)
Part C: Worksheet
(Give students worksheets with problems such as these.)
continued

58 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 5.5 (continued)
READING TEEN NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. Look at picture A. The big pile has 10 blocks in it. The small pile has
4 blocks in it. I'll count: 10 (pause), 11, 12, 13, 14. How many blocks?
2. There are 14 blocks. Put a circle around the numeral 14. (Check student 
work.)
3. Look at picture B. The big pile has 10 blocks in it. Start with 10 and 
count. Get ready.
4. How many blocks are there?
5. Circle the numeral 17.
(Repeat steps 4-6 with other examples.)
14
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
17
Format 5.6
WRITING TEEN NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
1. (Write the following place value chart on the board.) 
tens ones
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill—Components of Teen Numbers
1. You're going to write teen numerals. Remember, the ending "teen" 
tells you the numeral has one ten in the tens column.
Listen: 16. Write a 1 for the teen and then a 6. Listen: 19. What do I
write for 19
Listen: 14. What do I write for 14?
2. Your turn. 14. What do you write? (Monitor students as they write.)
3. (Repeat step 2 with 16, 19, 17, 18.)
4. (Give individual turns to several students on step 3.)
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
I write a 1 for the teen and a 9.
I write a 1 for the teen and a 4.
A 1 for the teen and a 4.
2. (Point to the tens column.) This is where we write a 1 for the ten.
Remember, for one ten we say "teen." What do we say for one ten?
3. What do I write for 14? (Write the numeral on the chart.)
4. (Repeat step 3 with 17, 19, 16, 18.)
5. (Call on students.) Read each numeral on the chart. (Point as 
students read.)
Part C: Structured Worksheet—Dictation
(Give students a worksheet similar to the one below.)
Teen
A 1 for the teen and a 4.
tens ones
a.
b.
c.
d.

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 59
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. Touch the space for problem a. You're going to write 14. What 
number?
2. What do you write for 14?
3. Write 14. (Monitor students as they write.) Read the numeral you 
just wrote.
4. (Repeat steps 1-3 for 16, 19, 14, 17, 18.)
Part D: Less Structured Worksheet—Dictation
1. (Give students a worksheet with a place value chart.) You're going to 
write 14 on the first line. What are you going to write?
Write 14.
2. (Repeat step 1 with 16, 18, 19, 17.)
14
A 1 for the teen and a 4.
14
14
Format 5.7
READING TENS NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill-Counting by tens
(Show students a diagram like the following.)
1. Each pile has 10 blocks. How many blocks in each pile? 10
2. Count by 10 each time I touch a pile. (Touch piles.) 10, 20, 30, 40, 50
3. How many blocks in all?
Right, five tens equal 50.
(Repeat steps 2 and 3 with two tens and four tens.)
Part B: Preskill-Tens Facts
1. (Erase board from Part A.) Let's practice with groups of 10. Listen. Three tens
50
equal 30. What do three tens equal?
2. What do two tens equal?
(Repeat with five tens, three tens, six tens, eight tens, and four tens until
30
20
students can respond correctly to all examples.)
3. (Present individual turns on step 2.)
Part C: Structured Board Presentation
(Write the following place value chart on the board.) 
tens ones
4 6
continued

60 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 5.7 (continued)
READING TENS NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Point to tens column.) What column?
(Point to ones column.) What column?
2. How many tens?
What do four tens equal?
3. How many ones?
What is 40 and 6?
So what does the whole numeral say?
(Repeat steps 2 and 3 with 52, 38, 93, 81.)
Part D: Less Structured Board Presentation
(Write the following place value chart on the board.) 
tens ones
7 2
1. What does this whole numeral say?
2. (Repeat step 1 with 95, 20, 16, 31, 47, 50, 12.)
3. (Give individual turns to several students.)
Part E: Less Structured Worksheet
tens column 
ones column 
4
40
6
46
46
1. (Hold up student worksheet.) Let's find out how many blocks are in this 
picture. How many piles of tens are there?
2. What do three tens equal?
3. But we're not done. (Point to four remaining blocks.) We have to count these 
blocks. (Point to tens group.) We have 30 blocks here. Start counting at 30 then 
touch these blocks as we count. (Count 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.)
4. How many blocks in the picture?
Put a circle around the numeral 34.
5. (Provide students with similar problems on worksheets for additional practice.)
3
30
30, 31, 32, 33, 34
34

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 61
Format 5.8
WRITING TENS NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
(Write the following place value chart on the board.) 
tens ones
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill—Expanded Notation
1. Say this number: 84.
2. Eighty-four equals 80 and 4. What does 84 equal? 
What's the first part of 84?
3. Eighty-four equals 80 and what else?
4. (Repeat steps 1-3 with 72, 95, 88, 43.)
Part B: Preskill—Tens Facts
84
80 and 4
80
4
1. Twenty has two tens. How many tens in 20?
2. How many tens in 40?
3. (Repeat step 3 with 80, 30, 60, 20, 50.)
4. (Give individual turns to several students.)
Part C: Structured Board Presentation
2
4
1.1 want to write some big numerals. When we write big numerals, we write the 
tens first. Then we write the ones. What do we write first?
What do we write next?
2. Listen: 84. What is the first part of 84?
3. How many tens in 80?
So I write 8 in the tens column. (Write 8 in the tens column.)
Eighty equals eight tens.
4. Listen: Eighty-four equals 80 and what else?
So I write 4 in the ones column. (Write 4 in the ones column.)
5. What numeral did I just write?
6. How many tens in 84?
How many ones in 84?
7. (Repeat steps 2-6 with several examples.)
Part D: Structured Worksheet Presentation
(Give students the following place value chart.)
the tens 
the ones 
80
8
4
84
8
4
tens ones
a.
b.
c. __ ______
d. _______
e.
f. J
1. Touch a. Next to a, you are going to write 79. 
What are you going to write?
continued

62 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 5.8 (continued)
WRITING TENS NUMERALS USING PLACEVALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. What is the first part of 75 
How many tens in 70?
Write 7 in the tens columr 
3. Seventy-nine equals 70 an
Write 9 in the ones colum 
4. What numeral did you wr 
5. How many tens in 79? 
6. How many ones in 79?
7. (Repeat steps 1-6 with 45, 
Part E: Less Structured Work: 
(Have students write a-f on i
1. You're going to write a nι 
2. Touch line a.
3. You're going to write 49., 
4. Write 49.
5. (Repeat steps 2-4 with 73,
)?
1.
d what else?
n.
ite?
19, 84, 76, and 12.)
sheet—Dictation
3 piece of paper similar to belo
a_____________________
b_____________________
c.____________________
d_____________________
e_____________________
f____ _ ____________ _ __ _
jmeral on each line.
What are you going to write?
20, 99, 14, 51, 42, 61, 17.)
w.)
70
7
9
79
7
9
49
Students write 49.
Format 5.9
READING HUNDREDS NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
(Show students a diagram like the following.) 
hundreds tens ones
5 4 8
(Point to appropriate column as you say the following.)
1. This is the hundreds column.
This is the tens column.
This is the ones column.
Tell me the names of the columns. (Point to the columns, starting with hundreds; 
repeat until students are firm.)
hundreds, tens, 
ones

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 63
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. The first thing we do when we read a numeral is identify the column the 
numeral starts in. (Point to 5 in 548.)
What column does this numeral start in?
How many hundreds do we have?
What do five hundreds equal?
3. (Point to 4.) What column is this?
How many tens do we have?
What do four tens equal?
4. (Point to 8.) What column is this?
How many ones do we have?
What do we say?
5. Let's read the whole numeral. When I touch each numeral, you tell me what it says.
(Point to 5, pause a second, touch 5.)
(Point to 4, pause a second, touch 4.)
(Point to 8, pause a second, touch 8.)
6. Say the whole numeral.
7. (Repeat steps 2-6 with 697, 351, 874, 932, all written in place value charts.)
Note: When presenting examples with a 1 in the tens column, present the following 
steps instead of steps 3, 4, and 5 in the format.
The following example shows how to teach the number 514.
What column is this?
How many tens do we have?
How many ones do we have?
We have one 10 and four ones, so what do we say?
Let's read the whole numeral. (Point to 5.) What do we say for this?
(Point to 14.) What do we say for these?
Say the whole numeral.
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
hundreds
5
500
tens
4
40
ones
8
8
500
40
8
548
tens
1
4
14
500
14
514
1. (Write the following chart on the board.) 
hundreds tens ones
4 4 6
2. Now we are going to read the numerals without saying the parts first. 
This time when I point, you are going to tell me the whole numeral. 
(Point to 446 and then pause 2-3 seconds.)
3. (Repeat step 2 with 249, 713, 321, 81, 720, 740.)
4. (Give individual turns to several students.)
446

64 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 5.10
WRITING HUNDREDS NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Worksheet Presentation—Dictation
(Give students a worksheet with a place value chart as illustrated.)
hundreds tens ones
a.
b. _______
c.
d.
e.
1. You are going to write hundreds numerals. Touch the hundreds column. Touch the 
tens column. Touch the ones column. (Monitor responses.)
2. What's the first part of 648?
So what column do you start writing in?
How many hundreds in 600?
Write 6 in the hundreds column.
3. What column comes next?
Do you hear a tens number in 648?
How many tens?
Write 4 in the tens column.
4. What column comes next?
Do you hear a ones number in 648?
How many ones?
Write 8 in the ones column.
5. We finished. How many hundreds in 648?
How many tens in 648?
How many ones in 648?
Read the numeral you wrote.
6. (Repeat steps 2-5 with 326, 463, 825, 253, 866.)
600 
hundreds
6
tens
yes
4
ones
yes
8
6
4
8
648

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 65
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Supervised Practice
(Give students a worksheet like the one below.)
two hundred 
sixty-one
hundreds tens ones
a. two hundred sixty-one
b. four hundred eighteen
c. eight
d. nine hundred sixty-two
e. forty-eight
f. four hundred eighty
g. twelve
h. nine hundred seven
i. forty-one
j. three hundred ninety-seven
1.
2.
3.
4.
The instructions tell you to write the numerals.
Item a. Read the words.
Write the numeral. (Monitor responses.)
(Repeat steps 2 and 3 with a few examples and then have them complete the rest of 
the worksheet independently.)
Format 5.11
READING THOUSANDS NUMERALS USING PLACE VALUE CONCEPTS
TEACHER
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. When a big number has one comma, the comma tells about thousands. 
Here's the rule: The numeral in front of the comma tells how many 
thousands. What does the numeral in front of the comma tell?
2. (Write 6,781 on the board.) What numeral comes in front of the comma?
So what is the first part of the numeral?
3. (Point to 781.) Get ready to read the rest of the numeral.
4. Now you are going to read the whole numeral. (Point to 6, then comma, 
then 781.)
5. (Repeat steps 2-4 with these numerals: 2,145; 3,150; 5,820; 6,423.)
6. (Give individual turns to several students.)
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write 3,820 on the board.) Read this numeral.
To correct: Repeat steps 2-4 from Part A.
2. (Repeat step 1 with 9,270; 3,174; 3,271; 9,563; 4,812.)
3. (Give individual turns to several students.)
STUDENTS
how many thousands
6
6 thousand
781
6,781
3,820

66 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 5.12
EXPANDED NOTATION (See Video A∕B)
TEACHER STUDENTS
w
Part A: Expanded Notation
1. Count by hundreds to 900. Get ready, count.
Now count by tens to 90. Get ready, count.
2. Listen to this number: 428. Do you hear hundreds in 428?
What hundreds number?
3. Listen again: 428. Do you hear a tens number in 428?
What tens number?
4. Listen again: 428. Do you hear a ones number in 428?
What ones number?
5. 428 = 400 + 20 + 8. Say it with me. 428 = 400 + 20 + 8
Say it by yourselves.
100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, 900
10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90
Yes
400
Yes
20
Yes
8
428 = 400 + 20 + 8
428 = 400 + 20 + 8
6. (Repeat steps 2-5 with 362, 624, and 139.)
7. (Give individual turns on steps 2-5 to several students.)
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. Listen to this number: 624. Say the number.
2. Now listen to me say 624 as an addition problem:
624
600 + 20 + 4
3. Your turn. Say 624 as an addition problem.
4. (Repeat step 3 with 528, 55, 871, 29, and 314.)
Part C: Structured Worksheet
1. Listen. Say 472 as an addition problem.
I'll write 472 as an addition problem. (Write on the board 
400 + 70 + 2.)
2. Listen. Say 528 as an addition problem.
Write 528 as an addition problem (Monitor student 
responses.)
3. (Repeat step 2 with 94, 427, 35, 53, and 266.)
Part D: Supervised Practice
(Give the students worksheets with problems like the following. 
Have students write each numeral on the worksheet as an 
addition problem. Monitor students' responses.)
a. 624 =_______ +________+_______
b. 386 = + +
600 + 20 + 4
400 + 70 + 2
500 + 20 + 8

Chapter 5 Symbol Identification and Place Value 67
Format 5.13
COLUMN ALIGNMENT
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Give students the following worksheet.)
a. 42 + 361 + 9 361
42
+ 9
b. 7 + 604 + 32
1. Touch problem a. I'll read it. 42 + 361 + 9. Problem a has been rewritten in a column. 
When we write column problems we write the largest numeral first, followed by the 
rest of the numerals. Touch the column problem. (Check.) The largest numeral is on 
top. What is that numeral? 361
Then the next largest numeral is written below. What numeral is that? 42
The smallest numeral is on the bottom. What is the smallest numeral? 9
2. Touch problem b. (Check.) Read the problem. 7 + 604 + 32
3. You are going to write the numerals in a column. You will write the largest numeral 
first. What is the largest numeral? 604
Write it and then cross out 604 in the row problem. (Check.)
4. What is the next largest numeral? 32
What column does 32 start in? tens
Write 32 and cross it out in the row problem. (Check.)
5. Now get ready to write the smallest numeral. What is the smallest numeral? 7
What column will you start writing in? ones
Write 7 and cross it out in the row problem. (Check.)
6. Have you crossed out all the numerals in the row problem? yes
What kind of problem is this? addition
Write in the sign. You are done writing the problem. Now work it. (Check.) 
7. (Repeat steps 2-6 with four more problems.)
