Direct Instruction Mathematics (5th ed.), Stein, Kinder, Silbert & Carnine — Chapter: Measurement, Time, and Money

Chapter
12
Measurement, Time, 
and Money
LEARNING OUTCOMES
12.1 Outline the recommended sequence for introducing measurement, time, and 
money and the rationale for that sequence.
12.2 Discuss how the basic concepts of measurement, time, and money are related.
12.3 Describe how the recommended teaching procedures for measurement are 
organized for both metric and customary measurement systems.
12.4 Outline the critical discriminations that students must make in order to tell time 
on an analog clock accurately.
12.5 Discuss the recommended sequence for teaching change-related money skills.
12.6 Outline procedures for diagnosing and remediating common error patterns in 
measurement, time, and money.
SKILL HIERARCHY
• ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
This chapter addresses three topics: measurement, time, and money. The measurement section 
includes a discussion of both customary and metric systems focused on length, weight, and 
capacity. The section on time provides guidance in teaching students to read both analog and 
digital clocks. The final section on money emphasizes instruction related to efficiently working 
with both coins and decimal notation.

246 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type 1Performance Indicator
Measurement
2 Customary units: length _____ inches in a foot
_____ feet in a yard
About how long is a spoon? 
6 inches 6 feet 6 yards
About how tall is a person? 
5 inches 5 feet 5 yards
How long is the line?
I ∣ I ∣ I ∣ I
_________1________ 2________ 3
How long is the line?
1 II ∣ Γ 1 1 ∣ 1 1 1 ∣
_________1________ 2________ 3
2 Metric units: length _____ centimeters in a meter
About how long is a pen? 
8 mm 8 cm 2 m 2 km
About how long is a car? 
2 mm 2 cm 2 m 2 km
About how much does a cat weigh? 
8 ounces 8 pounds 8 tons
About how much does a car weigh? 
2 ounces 2 pounds 2 tons
3 Customary units: liquid capacity _____ cups in a pint
_____ pints in a quart 
_____ quarts in a gallon
3 Metric units: weight _____ grams in a kilogram
About how much does a pencil weigh? 
75 mg 75 g 75 kg 75 eg
About how much does a newborn baby weigh? 
4 mg 4 g 4 kg 4 eg
3 Metric units: capacity _____ milliliters in a liter
How much milk can we put in a baby bottle? 
250 ml 250 dl 250 1 250 kl
How much water would a basketball hold? 
3 ml 3 dl 3 1 3 kl
3 Customary units: area and volume What is the area of a room 8 feet long and 10 feet
wide?_____

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 247
Time
4 Customary units: length—using a ruler to the 
nearest eighth-inch
'∣ ' ∣∣ MT∏∏'∣ ' . .......... ..
1_______ 2_______ 3
Make an X over 2¼
Make an R over 1½
Make a T over 2⅜
Make a B over 2¼
4 Customary units: operations—regrouping Circle the correct answer,
required 4 feet 5 inches
+3 feet 8 inches
8 feet 3 inches
8 feet 1 inch
7 feet 3 inches
4 Customary units: story problems—renaming Jasmine is 6 feet 2 inches. Her sister is 4 feet
10 inches. How much taller is Jill?
4 Conversions 4 feet =_____ inches
2 yards =_____ feet
36 inches =_____ feet
20 meters =_____ centimeters
5000 centigrams =_____ grams
500 kilometers =______meters
5 Metric equivalencies—less common units ’Circle the answer.
A kilogram equals:
1 gm 10 gm 100 gm 1,000 gm
A milliliter equals:
a tenth of a liter
a hundredth of a liter
a thousandth of a liter
Time expressed with hour stated first2 Put an X on the line under the clock that says 7:25.
continued

248 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART (continued)
Money
Value of single coins Show students a penny, nickel, dime, and quarter. 
Ask the students about the value of each coin:
How much is a nickel?
How much is a dime?
1
2
Determining value of groups of like coins
Determining value of groups of different 
coins
Ask students to count groups of pennies, nickels, 
dimes, or quarters.
Ask students to count groups of coins that include 
pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters.
Write the coins you would need to make 27c.
Write the coins you would need to make 79¢.
2 Adding dollars and cents $1.32 $4.78
+ $2.43 +$6.92
3 Determining change You bought a soda for 27¢ and gave the clerk 35¢. 
How much change should you receive?
3 Decimal notation: reading and writing dollar 
and cents notations
Write four dollars and six cents
Write nine dollars and thirty cents
Write one dollar and five cents
4 Decimal notation: subtracting dollars and 
cents from whole dollar figures
$15.00 - $1.35 =
$9.00 - $8.20 =
$10.00 - $6.16 =
4 Adding and subtracting whole dollars and 
dollar and cents amounts
Determining cost of purchase for two groups 
of items
DeAndre had $6. He spent $3.25. How much does 
he have left?
If you had $4 and you got $2.15 more, how much 
would you have?
4 You buy 3 pencils for 25¢ each and 5 pencils for 
50¢ each. How much do you spend?
You buy 5 pens for 75¢ each and 3 erasers for 
48tf each. How much do you spend?
4 Determining how much can be bought with 
specified amount
Yolanda wants to buy pencils that cost 27¢ each.
She has 2 dollar bills and a dime.
How many pencils can she buy?

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 249
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING
This chapter is devoted to three related but separate topics that are relevant to the type of practical 
math skills inherent in daily living. These topics are related in that each one uses numerical representations for concrete and abstract constructs required for general and workplace math literacy.
Measurement
Teachers working with beginning-level students should demonstrate with concrete objects how 
to use consistent units of measurement. Length is often introduced first. To develop a deeper 
conceptual understanding of measurement of length, the teacher may present an exercise in 
which students measure the lengths of various strips of paper using paper clips as the unit of 
measurement. The teacher demonstrates how to measure the paper strip by laying the clips along 
the edge of the paper and determining how long the paper is in paperclip units. For example, in 
the following illustration, the slip of paper is three clips long:
Following the demonstration, students are given the opportunity to independently determine the 
lengths of several strips of paper using paper clips.
This exercise serves two purposes. First, it introduces students to the concept of measuring 
a specific attribute, in this case, length. Second, it demonstrates how the units used for measurement are equivalent. The paper clips used in measuring length are always the same size.
Teachers can introduce weight measurement in the same way with a balance scale. First, 
the teacher demonstrates how the scale works, showing students that the weights on both sides 
of the scale are the same when the trays of the scale are the same height. Similarly, the teacher 
must show that when the weights are not the same, the side that is lower is heavier. Following the demonstration with a balance scale, the teacher introduces students to standard weights 
against which they can measure various objects. For example, blocks that weigh an ounce can be 
used as the measuring standard against which other objects can be measured.
For demonstrating the concept of capacity, the teacher can set out a number of empty cups, 
present a water-filled container, and pour the contents into the cups, one at a time, to determine 
the container’s capacity. The teacher would then ask how many cups of water the container holds.
Time
Because the notion of time is not concrete, students have much more difficulty understanding 
the concepts underlying various measures of time. Before teaching specific time-telling skills, 
teachers may want to introduce the concept of duration of time by engaging students in a variety 
of activities. For example, one activity might involve having students close their eyes and raise 
their hands when they predict a minute has gone by. After students experience firsthand different lengths of time (seconds, minutes), they can be asked to predict how long various activities 
might take and then check their predictions.
Money
The need for instruction in money-related skills is derived from their importance in daily activities. Many students come to school having had some experience with money. Teachers often 
build upon this prior experience through developing classroom or school stores. Students can 
learn about the value of different currencies (tokens, school-based currency, or even coins) 
through exercises of exchanging those currencies for goods or activities.
MEASUREMENT: CUSTOMARY AND METRIC UNITS
There are two basic measurement systems: the customary system, which is used in the United 
States and a few other countries, and the metric system, which is used in the majority of countries in the world.

250 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Customary Units
TABLE 12-1 Metric and Customary Units for Measuring Length, Weight, and Capacity
Length Weight Capacity
12 inches = 1 foot 
3 feet = 1 yard 
5,280 feet = 1 mile
16 ounces = 1 pound 
2,000 pounds = 1 ton
2 cups = 1 pint
2 pints = 1 quart
4 quarts = 1 gallon
Metric Units
Meaning of Prefix Length Weight Capacity
thousandth millimeter (mm) milligram (mg) milliliter (ml)
hundredth centimeter (cm) centigram (eg) centiliter (cl)
tenth decimeter (dm) decigram (dg) deciliter (dl)
whole meter (m) gram (g) liter (I)
10 wholes dekameter (dkm) dekagram (dkg) dekaliter (dkl)
100 wholes hectometer (hm) hectogram (hg) hectoliter (hl)
1,000 wholes kilometer (km) kilogram (kg) kiloliter (kl)
The metric system has several advantages over the customary system. First, since the metric 
system uses the base-10 place value system, instruction in decimals directly relates to measurement skills. With customary units, different place value base systems are required for weight 
(16 ounces), length (12 inches, 3 feet), and so on. Second, in the customary system, there is no 
commonality among the units for various measurements, while there is commonality among the 
metric units. The prefixes in the metric system (“milli-,” “centi-,” “deci-,” “deka-,” “hecto-,” 
“kilo-”) are used in each area: length, weight, and capacity.
Table 12.1 includes the various customary and metric units for expressing length, weight, 
and capacity. Note the consistency of the metric system. The prefix in front of a unit tells the 
unit’s relation to the base unit. At the same time, note how the various units in the customary 
system are different from one another.
A concern of many teachers is not whether to teach about the metric system but rather 
whether both systems should be taught simultaneously and, if not, which should be taught first. 
Unfortunately, there is no simple answer to this question. However, we have noticed that lower- 
performing students are likely to confuse facts from one system with facts from the other system 
when both are introduced concurrently. This information leads us to recommend that the two 
systems be taught independently of one another, preferably at different times during the year. 
Low-performing students should be familiar with common units from one system before the 
other system is introduced.
During the early grades, measurement instruction is relatively simple. Common units and 
equivalences are introduced, and students use tools to measure objects to the nearest whole unit. 
During the later elementary grades, measurement instruction becomes more complex as less 
commonly used units are introduced and more sophisticated uses of measuring tools are presented. Conversion problems in which students must convert a quantity expressed as one unit to 
a larger or smaller unit (5 meters = 500 centimeters) also are introduced.
Common Units and Equivalencies
During the early grades, students learn the more common units and their equivalencies. See 
Figure 12.1 for a table of commonly taught measurement facts. The basic procedure for introducing new units to students includes five steps. The teacher does the following:
1. Tells the function of the specific unit; for example, “Inches tell how long something is. We 
use inches to measure objects that are not very long. Feet also tell how long something is. 
We use feet to measure objects that are pretty long.”

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 251
2. Illustrates the unit; for example, the teacher draws lines on the board and shows students the 
length of an inch or a foot. For demonstrating weight, the teacher might give students blocks 
weighing an ounce or a pound.
3. Demonstrates how to use measuring tools, measuring to the nearest whole unit.
4. Presents application exercises in which the students determine the appropriate tool to use 
when measuring an object; for example, “What unit would we use to tell how long a piece 
of paper is? What unit would we use to tell how long the whiteboard is?”
5. Presents an equivalency fact, such as 12 inches equals one foot.
FIGURE 12.1 Measurement facts
U.S. System Metric System
1 inch LENGTH 1 centimeter 1 millimeter
1 foot is 12 inches
1 yard is 3 feet
1 yard is 36 inches
1 mile is 1760 yards
1 mile is 5280 feet
1 centimeter is 10 millimeters
1 meter is 1000 millimeters
1 meter is 100 centimeters
1 kilometer is 1000 meters
5 nickels weigh 
≡ about 1 ounce WEIGHT
A large paperclip 
weighs about 1 
gram
1 pound is 16 ounces 1 centigram is 10 milligrams
1 ton is 2000 pounds 1 gram is 1000 milligrams
1 gram is 100 centigrams
1 kilogram is 1000 grams
TIME
/ Tablespoon
1 cup is 16 tablespoons
66666 A milliliter is
CAPACITY 66666 about 20 drops
66666 of water
A milliliter is __
1 cubic 
centimeter
θ ∕WW ________________________
1 pint is 2 cups 0 e© 1 centiliter is 10 milliliters
1 quart is 2 pints
1 quart is 4 cups
0 00 1 liter is 1000 milliliters
1 gallon is 4 quarts
1 gallon is 8 pints
1 gallon is 16 cups
∩ MM
00000000
ΘΘΘΘΘ9ΘΘ
1 liter is 100 centiliters
1 kiloliter is 1000 liters
1 minute is 60 seconds
1 hour is 60 minutes
1 hour is 3600 seconds
1 day is 24 hours
1 week is 7 days
1 year is 52 weeks
1 year is 12 months
1 year is 365 days

252 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
FIGURE 12.2 Measurement review worksheet
Circle or fill in the answer.
1. A pencil is about 6 long.
2. A cat weighs about 8∙
3. A woman is about 5__________ tall.
4. He drinks a of milk every day.
5. How many inches in a foot?
6. How many feet in a yard?
7. How many ounces in a pound?
8. How many pints in a quart?
9. About how many pounds does a dog weigh?
10. About how many feet high is a door?
feet pounds inches pints
feet pounds inches pints
feet pounds inches pints
foot pound inch pint
2 20 200
8 80 800
Application exercises (step 4) and equivalencies (step 5) should incorporate review of previously introduced units from all areas. For example, if students have learned inch, foot, ounce, 
pound, and pint, a representative set of questions might include: “What unit would we use to tell 
how tall a person is? What unit would we use to tell how much a person weighs? What unit would 
we use to tell how much a letter weighs? What unit would we use to tell how long a pencil is?”
Equivalency review might include these questions: “How many ounces in a pound? How 
many inches in a foot? How many pints in a quart?” Review can be provided daily in worksheet 
exercises. A sample worksheet appears in Figure 12.2.
In addition to worksheet exercises, the teacher should incorporate measurement tasks into 
daily activities. Scales, thermometers, rulers, and liquid containers should be readily accessible. 
Teachers should provide opportunities for students to use measuring skills with concrete objects.
The sequence and rate of instruction for measurement facts and skills must be carefully 
controlled. New information is introduced cumulatively. That is, a new piece of information is 
not introduced until mastery of prior skills and information is demonstrated. Also, cumulative 
review of previously introduced information should be incorporated into daily exercises that 
introduce new skills.
In later elementary grades, after decimals have been taught, exercises designed to teach 
students about the structure of the metric system should be presented. Format 12.1: Metric 
Prefixes shows the steps for teaching students the prefixes for the metric system. In Parts A and B, 
the teacher presents the meaning of the prefixes. The prefixes for units less than 1 (“milli-,” 
“centi-,” and “deci-”) are presented in Part A. Note that the teacher must emphasize the /th/ 
ending of the words “thousandth,” “hundredth,” and “tenth” so that students will note they are 
fractions and pronounce them correctly. In Part B, the teacher presents the prefixes indicating 
units greater than 1 (“deka-,” “hecto-,” and “kilo-”). Depending on the level of students, a week 
or more of practice may be required to teach the meanings of these prefixes. The teacher should 
not go on to Part C until the students demonstrate knowledge of all the metric prefixes that have 
been introduced.
Part C teaches students to use their knowledge of metric prefixes to tell the value of metric 
units. For example, the teacher models by saying, “Since milli- means “a thousandth,” milligram 
refers to a thousandth of a gram.” Part D is a structured worksheet exercise in which students 
must find and circle the numerical representation of a specific metric unit. For example, a worksheet problem may ask students to identify the amount that equals a centimeter from the following choices: 100 meters, .01 meter, .10 meter. Note that the ability to read decimal numerals is a 
prerequisite for this task. Daily worksheet exercises would continue for several weeks.
Abbreviations for metric units also should be introduced in a worksheet exercise. Note that 
students may have difficulty translating the abbreviation to its corresponding word. Prior to 
introducing a worksheet exercise, teachers should devote instructional time to teaching metric 
abbreviations.
Measuring Tools
Calibrated measurement instruments include rulers, scales, and thermometers. Every calibrated 
instrument is divided into segments representing specific quantities. The easiest type of instrument to read is one in which each line represents one unit. For example, on most rulers found in 

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 253
kindergarten classrooms, each line represents one inch; likewise, on many weather thermometers, each line represents one degree.
Often, instruments label only some of the lines that stand for quantities:
Those instruments require students to figure out what the unmarked lines represent before they 
are able to read them. Instruments like the ruler and scales found in grocery stores often contain 
lines that represent fractions of a unit (¼ inch, 1∕8 pound). In the early grades, students learn to 
measure to the nearest whole unit, for example, length to the nearest inch (or centimeter) and 
weight to the nearest pound (or kilogram).
The ruler is often the first measuring tool introduced. The teacher would explain that the 
numerals on the ruler indicate how many inches from the end of the ruler to the line corresponding to that numeral. The teacher then models using the ruler to measure several lines or objects, 
pointing out the need to properly align the front end of the ruler and the beginning of the line or 
object being measured. Finally, the teacher has the students practice using the ruler.
For measuring weight using a calibrated scale, the students would put an object on the scale 
and read the numeral closest to the pointer. For measuring capacity, the students would fill a 
container with water, pour the water into a calibrated flask, and read the numeral closest to the 
water level. When teaching students to use measuring tools on which a line represents each unit 
but the relative value of each line is not shown:
10 20
the teacher models how to count from the last given unit to the target unit. In the example below, 
the teacher models counting from 25, touching and counting each line—25, 26, 27, 28—to the 
quantity.
In later grades, students are taught to read fractional parts of units. For example, once students can read rulers to the nearest inch, they can be introduced to rulers that include fractional 
parts. Rulers in the customary system are usually calibrated to allow measurement to the closest 
sixteenth of an inch. Because the different marks on the rulers tend to confuse students, we recommend preparing a set of rulers that includes a progression of fractional parts. In the first ruler, 
each inch is divided into halves. In the second ruler, each inch is divided into fourths. In the 
third and fourth rulers, each inch is divided respectively into eighths and sixteenths of an inch. 
Figure 12.3 illustrates a recommended set of rulers. Note that a preskill for using these tools is 
the ability to read and write mixed fractions.
A ruler in which an inch is divided into a greater number of parts is introduced only after 
students have demonstrated mastery in using the preceding ruler in the set.
A simple model-test procedure can be used to teach students to read units to the nearest 
half-inch. The teacher points out that since the line between the numerals divides the inch into 
two equal parts, each line represents a half-inch. The same procedure is used to introduce rulers 
divided into fourths. The teacher points out that since there are four parts between each inch, 
each inch is divided into fourths. The teacher then models and tests, reading the ruler starting 
at the ¼-inch mark: ¼, ¾, ¾, 1, 1¼, 1¾, 1¾, 2, and so on. Note that the teacher would not 
have the students read ¾ as 1∕2 at this time to emphasize that ¼-inch is the unit of measurement.

254 Part 11 Basic Concepts and Skills
a. Marked to the nearest half of an inch
FIGURE 12.3 Recommended set of rulers
b. Marked to the nearest quarter of an inch
c. Marked to the nearest eighth of an inch
d. Marked to the nearest sixteenth of an inch 
(standard rulers)
The teacher then presents an exercise in which she points to a line on the ruler and has students 
identify the measurement.
When students can identify the lengths represented by fourths on the ruler, the teacher 
can present an exercise to teach that the line that indicates ¾ of an inch also is the line that 
indicates 1∕2 of an inch. The teacher explains that the line is in the middle of the inch and so 
divides it into halves. The teacher explains further that when using a ruler, the length is always 
reported with the smallest numerical denominator. Therefore, instead of saying a line is 3¾ 
inches, the line is said to be 3½ inches. A practice exercise in which the teacher has the students find the lines on the ruler that represent various distances would follow the explanation 
(“Find the line on the ruler that shows 4½ inches. Find the line that shows 2¼ inches,” etc.). 
Practice can be provided in worksheet exercises like the one in Figure 12.4.
Rulers in which each inch is divided into eighths are introduced when students (a) can use 
rulers in which each inch is divided into fourths and (b) have learned fraction equivalency skills. 
Students should have had enough practice rewriting ⅝ as ¾, 4∕δ as ½, and ⅜ as ¼ so that they 
can make these conversions with ease. The teacher introduces the ruler containing eighths by 
pointing out that since each inch is divided into eight parts, the lines tell about eighths of an 
inch. The teacher then has students read the lines on the ruler representing eighths (1∕δ, ⅜, ⅜, 
4∕δ, ⅝, 6∕δ, 7∕δ, l1∕δ).
After several days, the teacher presents exercises teaching students to express ⅜, 4∕δ, and ⅝ 
as ¼, ½, and ¾, respectively. The teacher reminds students that length is always reported with 
fractions expressed in their simplest, smallest possible terms, and then he models and tests the 
various equivalencies.
The same basic procedure is followed for introducing rulers in which each inch is divided 
into sixteenths. These rulers should not be introduced, however, until students are comfortable 
using the ruler divided into eighths. Daily practice over a long period is needed to develop student fluency in these skills.
FIGURE 12.4 Worksheet exercise for determining length
1 2 3 4 5
Make an X over the line that indicates 3¾ inches.
Make an R over the line that indicates 2⅛ inches.
Make an S over the line that indicates ⅝ of an inch.
Make a B over the line that indicates 2⅜ inches.

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 255
Conversion Problems
This section addresses problems in which students must convert a quantity expressed as one 
unit into an equal quantity expressed in terms of a larger or smaller unit; for example, 3 feet can 
be converted to 36 inches, 2 meters to 200 centimeters. The preskill for conversion problems is 
knowledge of equivalencies. Students cannot convert 5 kilograms to grams unless they know the 
number of grams in 1 kilogram. Conversion problems should not be taught until students have 
mastered the necessary equivalencies.
There are four basic steps in any conversion problem: (a) determine whether the “new” unit 
is larger or smaller than the original unit, (b) determine the operation, (c) determine the equivalency fact, and (d) solve the problem. These steps are listed in Summary Box 12.1.
Converting Metric Units Early elementary grade teachers should limit examples of conversions 
with small quantities of common units (5 meters =centimeters). In later grades, teachers 
can present the conversion strategy with larger numbers. Below is a description of the procedure for 
teaching conversion with metric units. Before the metric conversion strategy is introduced, students 
should know the equivalencies of the metric units, be able to read and write mixed decimals and 
decimal numerals, and be able to multiply and divide by multiples of 10 by moving the decimal point 
to the right or the left. When dividing, the decimal point is moved to the left. For example, when 
dividing by 10, the decimal point is moved one place to the left (75 ÷ 10 = 7.5); by 100, two places 
(75 ÷ 100 = .75); by 1,000, three places to the left (75 ÷ 1000 = .075). When multiplying, the 
decimal point is moved to the right. Instructions for teaching multiplying decimals by multiples of 10 
appears in Chapter 14, “Decimals,” in Format 14.9: Preskill: Multiplying Decimals by Multiples 
of 10. A similar exercise would be used to teach students to divide by multiples of 10.
Before beginning conversion exercises, the teacher should give students worksheets like 
the one in Figure 12.5, designed to provide practice in dividing and multiplying by multiples 
of 10. The discussion in Chapter 14 on multiplying decimals by multiples of 10 specifies types 
of examples to include in these worksheet exercises. In some multiplication problems, students 
should have to add one or more zeros (100 × 3.5 = 350.0). In some division problems, students should have to add a zero in front of the original digits (3.5 ÷ 100 = .035). Such examples are difficult and require initial modeling and extended practice over several weeks.
SUMMARY, BOX 12.1
Steps in Basic Conversion Problems
Problem a Problem b Problem c Problem d
1. Determine 
whether 
the new 
quantity is 
a bigger or 
smaller unit.
48 inches =___  
feet
Change inches 
to feet. Feet is 
a bigger unit.
3 pounds =___  
ounces
Change pounds 
to ounces. 
Ounces is a 
smaller unit.
5 kilograms =___  
grams
Change kilograms 
to grams. Grams is 
a smaller unit.
300 centimeters =___  
meters
Change centimeters 
to meters. Meters is 
a bigger unit.
2. Determine 
the operation: Multiply 
if changing 
to a smaller 
unit; Divide if 
changing to a 
bigger unit.
Since change 
is to a bigger 
unit, division is 
required.
Since change 
is to a smaller 
unit, multiplication is 
required.
Since change is 
to a smaller unit, 
multiplication is 
required.
Since change is to a 
bigger unit, division 
is required.
3. Determine 
the equivalency fact.
12 inches in a 
foot
16 ounces in a 
pound
1,000 kilograms 
in a gram
100 centimeters in a 
meter
4. Solve the 
problem.
48 inches ÷ 12 =
4 feet
3 pounds × 16 =
48 ounces
5 kilograms × 1000 
= 5,000 grams
300 centimeters ÷ 100 
= 3 meters

256 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
FIGURE 12.5 Worksheet on multiplying and dividing by 10
a. 37 × 100 =_____ b. 4 ÷ 1000 =_____ c. 53.2 × 100 =___ _ d. 7.04 × 10 = .
e. 4.8 × 1000 =___ _ f. 28.5 ÷ 10=___ _ g.72 × 1000 = ___ _ h. .37 × 100 = .
i. 7 ÷ 100 =_____ j. .37 × 100 =____ k. 5.43 × 10 =____ I. .4 × 1000 = _
m. 37 ÷ 10 =_____ n.4.2 ÷ 10 =____ o. 72 ÷ 10 =_____ p. 38 ÷ 10 = _
q. 52 × 100 =____ r. 4.8 ÷ 1000 =__ __  s. 400 ÷ 1000 =___ t. 52 ÷ 100 = _
Format 12.2B:
Metric Conversions 
Watch how Kristen introduces 
the metric conversion rule.
Format 12.2C: Metric 
Conversions
Watch how Kristen introduces 
her students to all of the steps of 
the conversion strategy.
A format for presenting the conversion strategy appears in Format 12.2: Metric Conversions. As mentioned earlier, this format assumes that students have mastered the metric equivalencies. If students have not learned the equivalency preskills, they will find the conversion 
exercises quite difficult and frustrating. The format contains four parts: Parts A and B teach 
important component skills. Part A teaches students to determine whether they are changing the 
original unit to a bigger or smaller unit. Part B presents the rules: When we change to a bigger 
unit, we divide; when we change to a smaller unit, we multiply. Part B concludes with an exercise in which the teacher writes sets of units on the board, such as centigram → gram, and leads 
the students in determining the appropriate operation.
Part C is a structured board presentation in which the teacher presents all the steps 
in the conversion strategy. After the students determine whether to multiply or divide, the 
teacher leads them through using the equivalency fact to determine the number by which 
to multiply or divide. “There are 100 centigrams in a gram, so we divide by 100.” Finally, 
the teacher demonstrates moving the decimal as a quick way of multiplying or dividing by 
multiples of 10. Part D is a structured worksheet exercise. Because this exercise incorporates several difficult component skills, a great amount of practice is necessary to develop 
mastery.
Four example-selection guidelines are important in teaching conversion problems:
1. In all problems, one of the units should be a base unit. The base units are grams, meters, or 
liters.
2. In half of the problems, the students should convert a unit to a larger unit; in the other half, 
the students should convert to a smaller unit.
3. In half of the problems, the quantity of original units should be a whole number; in the other 
half, the quantity should be a decimal or mixed number.
4. The amount the student multiplies or divides should vary from problem to problem, for 
example, 10 in one problem, 1,000 in the next, 100 in the next.
An example of an appropriate set of problems, following the guidelines, appears below. The 
answers are in parentheses.
142 centigrams =grams (1.42)
9 .8 grams =______ milligrams (9,800)
35 decigrams =grams (3.5)
20 hectograms =grams (2,000)
4.35 grams =_____ milligrams (4,350)
Note that the examples shown in Format 12.2: Metric Conversions all refer to grams. 
The next day’s unit of measurement might include liters or meters.
Converting Customary Units Teaching students to convert quantities from one unit to 
another is more difficult in the customary system than in the metric system for three specific 
reasons. First, in metric conversions the students always multiply or divide by a multiple of 10, 
but in conversion problems with customary units, the number to multiply or divide by varies 
from problem to problem; converting inches to feet requires division by 12, and converting feet 
to yards requires division by 3.
A second reason for increased difficulty involves the procedures used when the converted 
unit is not a multiple of the original unit. In that case, the answer must be expressed in terms of a 
mixed number with two different units (7 feet — 2 yards, 1 foot).

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 257
A final reason why customary conversions are more difficult is that conversions are sometimes made to a unit two or more steps removed. In the metric system, the original unit is simply 
multiplied or divided by 10, 100, or 1,000. In the customary system, several conversions may 
be required. For example, to convert gallons to cups, the student must first convert gallons to 
quarts, quarts to pints, then pints to cups.
The sequence for introducing conversion problems with customary units should be carefully controlled, with easier problems introduced first. The three basic types of conversion problems in the customary system are illustrated below:
1. Converting a quantity of a specified unit into a quantity of the next larger or smaller unit 
(examples involve whole numerals only):
28 days equal weeks
6 feet equal yards
24 inches equal feet
4 weeks equal days
2 yards equal feet
2 feet equal_______ inches
2. Converting a unit into a mixed numeral (and vice versa) containing the next larger or smaller 
quantity:
27 inches equal feet_______ inches
19 ounces equal pound(s)ounces
13 days equal weeks(s)days
2 feet 3 inches equal_______ inches
1 pound 3 ounces equal ounces
3. Converting a unit into a unit twice removed:
2 yards equal inches
2 quarts equal cups
72 inches equal yards
16 cups equal quarts
The preskills for teaching conversion problems with customary units are knowledge of 
equivalencies and knowledge of multiplication and division facts. Since measurement conversion tasks are usually introduced before students can divide by two-digit numbers, the teacher 
may choose to teach the students to count by twelves. Knowing this count-by series will help 
students in converting inches to feet and in determining dozens.
The format for introducing the first type of customary conversion problems (problems in 
which a unit is converted evenly into the next larger or smaller unit) is basically the same as that 
for converting metric units (see Format 12.2: Metric Conversions). The teacher has students 
(a) determine whether the “new” unit is larger or smaller than the original unit, (b) determine the 
operation, (c) determine the equivalency fact, and (d) solve the problem. “We want to find how 
many ounces in 6 pounds. We’re changing to a smaller unit, so we multiply. There are 16 ounces 
in a pound, so we multiply by 16.”
The procedure for problems in which the conversion results in a remainder (27 inches equal 
2 feet 3 inches) is the same as for the previous type of problem except the teacher must explain 
what to do with the remainder. For example, in solving the problem 27 inches = feet, 
after the students determine that 27 must be divided by 12, the teacher points out that since 12 
goes into 27 with a remainder, the remainder tells the number of inches left.
A format for converting a mixed quantity to a lower unit appears in Format 12.3: Converting from Mixed Numbers. When converting 2 feet 11 inches to inches, the teacher has the students cross out the 2 and write 24, the number of inches, above it. Then they add that quantity, 
24 inches, to the 11 inches to end up with 35 inches.
Problems in which students must convert to a unit twice removed are quite difficult (2 yards = 
inches). The strategy we recommend involves having the students translate the quantity unit by unit. For example, in converting 2 yards to inches, the student would first convert 
2 yards to 6 feet, then 6 feet to 72 inches.

258 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Operations
This section addresses addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division operations with me< .- 
surement units. As with most measurement-related skills, performing operations with customaι y 
units is more difficult than performing operations with metric units. The differences arise in 
problems that require renaming. Since the metric system uses a base-10 place value system, 
renaming presents no problems. Students merely apply the renaming skills they learned pre - 
viously in decimal instruction. However, when working with customary units, there is not a 
consistent base to use when renaming. For example, the base for pounds is 16 (16 ounces in on 2 
pound); for feet, 12 (12 inches in one foot). Students must be taught to use these bases rather 
than base 10 for problems that require renaming.
Addition and subtraction problems with measurement units are usually introduced in fourt ι 
or fifth grade. The operations cause little difficulty in measurement problems that do not involv 5 
renaming:
6 lb 4 oz 6 lb 4 oz 6 lb 4 oz
+1 lb 1 oz -1 lb 1 oz × 2
7 lb 5 oz 5 lb 3 oz 12 lb 8 oz
3 lb 2 oz 6.4 kg 6.4 kg
2)6 lb 4 oz +1.1 kg +1.1 kg
7.5 kg 5.3 kg
6.4 kg 3.2 kg
× 2 2)6.4 kg
12.8 kg
Problems that do require renaming, on the other hand, are quite difficult:
4 18 / 4 14
5, lb 2 oz 3 weeks 4 days 5 ft 2 in
—3 lb 4 oz +1 weeks 5 days —2 ft 8 in
1 lb 14 oz 5 weeks 9f days —2 ft 6 in
2
A preskill for renaming problems is converting units, which was discussed previously 
When working an addition problem, the teacher instructs students to always start working with 
the smaller unit. The difficult part of addition problems occurs after students have derived a sum 
that includes enough of the smaller unit to form a larger unit. In the following problem,
3 ft 8 in
+ 2 ft 6 in
14 in
the students add 8 and 6 to equal 14 inches, which is more than 1 foot. Because 12 inches 
equals 1 foot, the student must add 1 unit to the feet column and subtract the 12 inches from the 
14 inches, leaving the remaining 2 inches.
1
3 ft 8 in
+ 2 ft 6 in
.14
2
The teacher leads students through sets of problems, renaming when needed: “Remember, we’re 
adding inches. How many inches in a foot? Yes, 12 inches in a foot. So if we have 12 or more 
inches in the inches column, we must rename 12 inches as one foot.”
Format 12.4: Renaming Customary Units shows how to teach addition problems with 
renaming. Teaching students when to rename and what numerals to use is critical when teaching operations with customary units. Part A of the structured board presentation focuses on 
when renaming is appropriate. Part B is a structured worksheet that provides discrimination

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 259
practice in renaming with the appropriate numerals. Note that discrimination practice should 
include problems that require renaming and problems that do not require renaming. The examples in the format involve weight units; similar exercises should be done with length and capacity units.
After students can rename a variety of units when adding, they are given problems with 
subtraction. The difficult aspect of subtraction problems lies in renaming the minuend. For 
example, to work the following problem,
8 lb 4 oz
—3 lb 8 oz
students must rename 8 pounds 4 ounces, by taking a pound from 8 pounds (leaving 7 pounds), 
and increasing the ounces by 16 ounces (a pound) so there are 20 ounces:
7 20
gib 4oz
—3 lb 8 oz
We recommend that teachers introduce this skill by first presenting problems in which a 
mixed unit is subtracted from a whole unit. Following are examples of such problems:
3 ft 8 lb
-1 ft 4 in —2 lb 5 oz
The teacher leads students through working these problems, pointing out the need to rename 
and how to rename: “We must take a foot from 3 feet. I’ll cross out 3 feet and write 2. I took 
a foot from 3 feet. How many inches in a foot? So I write 12 in the inches column.” After several days of practice, more difficult problems in which two mixed numbers are involved can be 
introduced. An example of a structured worksheet part of a format for subtraction problems with 
renaming appears in Format 12.5: Subtraction with Renaming.
Multiplication and division problems that require renaming with measurement units are 
quite difficult. A strategy for working multiplication problems involves teaching the students to 
first multiply each unit. For example, in the problem
5 ft 7 in 
× 4
the students first multiply 4 × 7 inches, then 4 × 5 feet, writing the products for each:
5 ft 7 in 
× 4
20 ft 28 in
After the products are written for each unit, the students rename, converting the smaller quantity 
and adding:
5 ft 7 in
× 4
20 ft 2X in 
2ft 4 in 
22 ft 4 in
Division problems, on the other hand, require a unique strategy. The students rewrite 
the quantity in terms of its lower units before working the problem. For example, in dividing 
3 pounds 4 ounces by 2, we suggest converting 3 pounds 4 ounces to 52 ounces, dividing 52 by 
2, which equals 26 ounces, then converting the 26 ounces to 1 pound 10 ounces.
Word Problems
Word problems involving measurement units can be introduced as soon as students have learned 
to work the respective operations. The strategies are the same as outlined in Chapter 11. Students 
may require explicit instruction when solving measurement word problems. Initial modeling and 

260 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
extensive practice are required with the introduction of each operation. Following are examples 
of measurement word problems for different operations:
Division:
Marshawn has 2 feet of ribbon. He wants to make kites. Each kite needs 4 inches of ribbon.
How many kites can Marshawn make?
Subtraction:
Tania weighed 8 pounds, 4 ounces when she was born. Three months later, she weighed
11 pounds, 7 ounces. How much weight did she gain in those 3 months?
Multi-step:
Rose’s plant is 4 feet tall. If it grows 3 inches a year for 5 years, how tall will it be?
TIME
Telling time is not as easy for all students to learn as teachers sometimes assume. Its difficulty is 
due to the number of discriminations students must make. The following list outlines discriminations that, if not properly taught, tend to cause errors, especially for low-performing students:
1. Discriminating the direction the clock hands move (clockwise versus counter-clockwise);
2. Discriminating the minute hand from the hour hand;
3. Discriminating minutes (which are not represented by the numerals on the clock) from 
hours (which are represented by the numerals on the clock) and;
4. Discriminating time-related vocabulary; for example, when to use “after” and when to use 
“before.”
Because of these potentially troublesome discriminations, telling time is divided into two 
stages. First, students are taught a strategy for figuring out the time and expressing it as minutes after the hour. Second, when students have mastered minutes after the hour, alternate ways 
of telling time are taught, such as reading a digital clock, using the terms “quarter past” and 
“half past,” and expressing time as minutes before the hour. See the Instructional Sequence and 
Assessment Chart for details and examples.
Minutes After the Hour
Preskills The four major preskills for telling time are (a) knowledge of the direction in 
which the hands of the clock move, (b) discrimination of the hour hand from the minute hand, 
(c) counting by fives, and (d) switching from counting by fives to counting by ones, which is 
needed to determine the number of minutes (5, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19).
The preskill of knowing which direction the hands on a clock move is critical if students are 
to figure out the correct hour. A convenient way to teach students about direction on a clock is to 
have them fill in the missing numerals on several clocks containing boxes instead of numerals:
By doing this exercise, students can develop the pattern of moving in a clockwise direction 
around the clock face. In the first exercises, some of the numerals should be included as prompts 
on the clock (3, 6, 9, 12). After several lessons, however, these prompts should be removed, and 
the students should fill in all the numerals themselves. Teachers need to monitor students carefully while they work to make sure they fill in numerals in the proper direction. Teachers also 
can use a clock with movable hands and ask students to move the clock hands in the appropriate 
direction to assess student understanding of the concept.

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 261
Counting by fives is the initial way students are taught to determine the number of minutes. 
They are taught to start at the top of the clock, say, zero, and then count the numerals by fives 
until they reach the minute hand. Later, the procedure is modified to teach students to determine 
the number of minutes when the minute hand is not pointing to a multiple of 5. Procedures for 
teaching counting by fives can be found in Chapter 4.
Discrimination of the hour hand from the minute hand is taught by describing each hand 
(the short hand is the hour hand, and the long hand is the minute hand) and then by providing 
discrimination practice in which students identify the hands. The teacher should present pictures 
of clocks and ask about each hand: “Which hand is this? How do you know it’s the minute hand? 
Yes, the long hand is the minute hand.” Commercial instructional clocks are well-suited for this 
exercise because teachers can manipulate the hands of the clock. The hands on the clocks used 
for initial instruction should be easy to tell apart.
Units of 5 Minutes The steps for teaching students to tell time by determining the number 
of minutes (in units of 5) after the hour is divided into five parts. (See Format 12.6: Expressing 
Time as Minutes After the Hour.) Part A teaches students to read the hour. The teacher reminds 
students that the hour hand is the short hand and demonstrates how to figure out the hour by starting at the top of the clock and saying the numerals on the clock until reaching the hour hand.
Part B teaches students to determine the number of minutes after the hour. The teacher instructs 
students that the long hand is the minute hand and that the minute hand says to count by fives. The 
teacher then models and tests figuring out the minutes. The students are taught to start at the 12, say 
zero, and then count by 5 for each numeral, stopping at the numeral to which the minute hand is 
pointing. All examples in this format would have the minute hand pointing directly to a numeral.
Part C includes a board demonstration of how the strategies for determining minutes and 
hours are combined into a complete strategy for figuring out the time. Parts D and E are structured and less structured worksheet exercises in which the students are shown clocks and asked 
to write the time. Daily practice with telling time should be continued for several weeks until 
students have mastered the concepts.
To help students discriminate the hour and minute hands, we recommend that for the first 
several days, teachers use illustrations like the one below, in which the minute hand is drawn 
longer than usual. Note that in the illustration, the minute hand extends outside the clock and is 
written as a thin line so that it does not block students’ view of the numerals on the clock.
When constructing a set of practice examples, the teacher must be quite careful to include a 
wide range of problems. In half of the clocks, the hour hand should be pointing toward the right 
side of the clock; on the other clocks, the hour hand should be pointing toward the left side of the 
clock. The same recommendation holds true for the minute hand. Varying examples helps prevent 
students from developing misrules that the strategies apply only to certain positions on the clock.
Also, examples should be arranged so that in half of the examples, the minute hand is pointing to a numeral larger than the one to which the hour hand is pointing. If the minute hand were 
pointing to the smaller numeral in all the examples, students might inadvertently learn that the 
hand pointing to the smaller numeral is the minute hand.
For the first week or two, examples in which the minute hand is pointing to the 12 are 
expressed as zero minutes after the hour. When students have demonstrated the ability to use 
the minutes-after strategy, the teacher can present the convention for saying o’clock. “When it’s 
zero minutes after 4, we say it is 4 o’clock.”
As students learn multiplication facts, they should be encouraged to use their knowledge of 
facts in determining the minutes rather than always starting at the top and counting by fives. The 
teacher explains that in figuring out minutes, each numeral stands for a group of five. Therefore, 
when the minute hand points to 4, it is the same as four groups of five. Instead of counting, the 
minutes can be determined by solving 4 × 5.

262 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Units of Single Minutes After several weeks of practice expressing time with examples in 
which the minute hand points directly to a numeral, students can learn to express time when the 
minute hand is pointing between numerals. Note the following example:
No elaborate teaching format is required to introduce this skill. Students are told that when 
they count the spaces in between the numerals, they are counting by ones. The teacher then 
models the process of counting by fives and switching to ones: “5, 10, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23; the 
time is 23 minutes after 7.”
Alternate Ways of Expressing Time
Digital Clocks When students are able to express time as minutes after the hour, digital 
clocks may be introduced. The time on digital clocks is represented by the hour followed by the 
minutes. For example, 3:14 is read as three-fourteen, which means 14 minutes after 3. Prior to 
introducing digital clocks, students need to be taught to translate minutes after the hour to the 
hour followed by the minutes. The teacher would model and have students practice expressing 
time in both ways, such as:
“IT1 say the time one way, and then say it another way. Listen: 8:24. I’ll say the time the 
other way: 24 minutes after 8. Your turn: 8:24. Say the time the other way.” Repeat with 
4:15,7:32,9:28.
The purpose of this practice is to ensure that students understand the relationship between these 
two ways of expressing time before they are introduced to digital clocks. To teach students to 
read a digital clock, the teacher simply models and tests several examples of telling time on a 
digital clock.
After students have learned to read time from analog and digital clocks, students can be 
taught how to write time using a colon. A written task, like the one below, in which students 
are required to express the time as both minutes after the hour and as the hour and then minutes, 
should be introduced next. This activity not only strengthens the relationship between telling 
time as minutes after the hour and the hour followed by minutes but also provides practice in 
writing time using a colon.
 minutes after 
Times representing less than 10 minutes after the hour are particularly difficult to write, 
since a zero must be added when the time is expressed both verbally and in written form. For 
example, 8 minutes after 6 is written as 6:08 and stated as six oh eight. This type of example 
should not be introduced until students have mastered easier ones. Several of these more difficult examples should appear thereafter on worksheet exercises.
Quarter After and Half Past The terms “quarter after” and “half past” are introduced when 
students master expressing time as minutes after the hour: A “quarter after” means 15 minutes 
after; “half past” means 30 minutes after. Teachers working with struggling students would not 

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 263
introduce both terms at the same time. The instructional procedure for teaching “quarter after” 
consists of modeling and testing on several examples:
1. Another way of saying 15 minutes after 2 is a quarter after two.
2. What’s another way of saying 15 minutes after 2?
3. What’s another way of saying 15 minutes after 8?
Next, an exercise in which the teacher states the time as a quarter after and the students 
restate it as minutes after is presented: “If it’s a quarter after 2, how many minutes after 2 is it?” 
The same procedure is used to teach half past the hour. The final task consists of a discrimination exercise including times representing both quarter after and half past the hour:
1. What’s another way of saying 15 minutes after 6?
2. What’s another way of saying 30 minutes after 6?
3. If it’s half past 4, how many minutes after 4 is it?
4. If it’s a quarter after 4, how many minutes after 4 is it?
Minutes Before the Hour Teachers should not introduce telling time as minutes before the 
hour until students can express time as minutes after the hour with accuracy and fluency. The 
procedure for teaching students to express time as minutes before the hour is somewhat similar 
to the one used for teaching students to express time as minutes after the hour. First, the teacher 
presents a strategy to figure out the hour, then a strategy to figure out the minutes, and then 
an exercise in which both strategies are applied to express the time. Format 12.7: Expressing 
Time as Minutes Before the Hour outlines the steps in this strategy.
In Part A, the teacher places the hour hand between two numerals and then models and 
tests identifying the hour after and the hour before. For example, if the hour hand were pointing 
between 5 and 6, the teacher would say the hour is after 5 and before 6. In Part B, the teacher 
shows students how to figure out the number of minutes before the hour. He points in a counterclockwise direction and explains that in determining minutes before the hour, students need 
to start at the 12 but count in “this” direction (pointing counterclockwise). He would model and 
test several examples before introducing Part C, a structured board exercise in which the teacher 
leads students through expressing time as minutes before the hour. Part D is a structured worksheet that provides practice expressing time as minutes before the hour.
During the first week that expressing time as minutes before the hour is presented, the minute hand should point directly to the numerals so that all minutes are multiples of five. Examples 
in which the minute hand points to a line between the numerals are introduced later. Examples 
should be limited to times that are 30 minutes or less before the hour because typically those are 
the only times expressed as minutes before the hour.
MONEY
The need for instruction in money-related skills is derived from their importance in daily activities. Included in this chapter are procedures for (a) determining the value of a group of coins, 
(b) consumer-related instruction, and (c) decimal notation for money. A more in-depth list of 
problem types appears in the Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart.
Determining the Value of a Group of Coins
The preskills for determining the value of a group of coins include the ability to identify and 
tell the value of individual coins and knowledge of the 5, 10, and 25 count-by series. Students 
usually are taught to identify coins in the first grade. This is a fairly simple preskill to teach, 
given that many students already will be able to recognize coins. A format similar to that used in 
symbol identification is taught for coin identification. The teacher initially models and tests the 
name of the coin and then models and tests its value: “This is a nickel. What is this? . .. A nickel 
is worth 5¢. How much is a nickel worth? ...” For this task, the teacher can use either real coins 
or pictures of coins.

264 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
The penny and nickel should be introduced first. After students can label and state their 
values, dimes can be introduced, followed by quarters. Note that the coins are introduced cumulatively, which implies that students must be able to discriminate the new coin from previously 
introduced coins before the teacher can present a new example.
The preskill required for counting groups of similar coins is knowledge of the respective 
count-by series. Once students have learned the count-by series, they have little trouble applying the skill to coin counting. In teaching students to count groups of similar coins for the first 
time, the teacher indicates the value of the coin and then models counting. For example, “Here 
is a group of nickels. Each nickel is worth 50. To find out how many cents this group of nickels 
equals, I count by fives. My turn.” The teacher then counts by fives as she touches each coin. 
After modeling, the teacher tests students on counting several sets of identical coins. Worksheet 
exercises like the one in Figure 12.6 should follow the teacher’s presentation.
Problems in which students determine the value of a set of mixed coins are usually introduced in second grade and contain just two or three coins. In later grades, the number of coins 
counted can be increased. We recommend a two-step strategy: (a) grouping like coins together 
and (b) starting with the coin worth the most and counting all like coins before counting the 
lower valued coins. For example, in counting two quarters, three dimes, and two nickels, 
students would begin counting the two quarters (25, 50), switch to the dimes (60, 70, 80), and 
switch once more to the nickels (85, 90).
Beginning with higher-valued coins is recommended over beginning with lower-valued 
coins, since counting lower-valued coins first often results in a difficult counting sequence. For 
example, to count a quarter, dime, nickel, and two pennies starting with the lower valued coins, 
the student would count 1, 2, 7, 17, 42; as opposed to starting with higher-valued coins and 
counting 25, 35, 40, 41, 42, which is much easier.
A preskill for counting a group of unlike coins is knowledge of addition facts in which 10, 
5, or 1 is added to a two-digit number ending in zero or 5 (70 and 10 more is. . . 70 and 5 more 
is.. .). This preskill is taught using a model-test procedure in which the teacher models then tests 
students on a set of problems (40 and 10 more, 45 and 5 more, 40 and 1 more).
Facts in which 10 is added to a two-digit number ending in 5 (35 + 10, 65 + 10) are particularly difficult because the sequence of counting by 10s that always yields a tens multiple
FIGURE 12.6 Coin counting worksheet

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 265
(10, 20, 30) cannot be applied. Therefore, these facts should not be introduced until the easier 
facts are mastered. If teachers use worksheets to provide this practice, they should write problems horizontally and indicate to students that they are to complete the problems mentally.
Determining equivalencies involving coins is a basic money skill that serves as a prerequisite for many consumer skills. Two kinds of equivalent change exercises are presented in 
Format 12.8: Coin Equivalencies. In Part A of the format, the teacher has students determine the number of smaller-valued coins equal to a larger-valued coin. In this exercise, students are always counting similar coins. In Part B of the format, the students must count 
a set of mixed coins to determine whether a given amount of change is equivalent to the 
amount stated. Initially, coin equivalency problems should include pennies, nickels, dimes, 
and quarters (a quarter equals two dimes and a nickel). Larger values, including dollar bills, 
are introduced later.
Worksheet exercises like Figure 12.7 present a different application of the coin equivalency skill. In these exercises, students circle the appropriate more, less, or equal sign 
between two groups of coins. To introduce this exercise, the teacher leads the students in 
counting the coins in each group. After counting the coins, the students are instructed to 
write above each group its value. If the values are equal, the student is instructed to circle the 
equal sign. If the values of the groups are not equal, the students circle the appropriate more 
than or less than sign.
Consumer-Related Money Skills
Two consumer-related money skills are discussed in this section: (a) verifying the change 
received from a purchase and (b) counting change. These skills are generally taught in third 
grade. The primary preskill for counting change is the ability to count groups of coins.
Verifying Change Received The easiest way to verify change received when making a purchase is to begin at the price of the item(s) and then count the coins received as change. Format 
12.9: Verifying Change outlines the teaching procedures for this strategy. Students begin counting from the price of the item starting with the least valued coin, continuing with greater valued 
coins until the original amount given for the item is reached.
Initial examples should be relatively easy, including small numbers of coins. An example 
appropriate for the introduction of the skill might consist of paying 40¢ for an object costing 
360. To verify the change in this example, students need to count only pennies: 37, 38, 39, 40. A 
later example might involve paying a dollar for an object costing 360, for which students would 
need to count pennies, dimes, and quarters.
Problems involving more than one dollar are introduced last. Note that the same strategy 
applies to counting change from dollars. The student counts the change to determine if the 
object’s cost plus the change equals the payment price. For example, if an object costing 370 
is paid for with a $10 bill, counting change would proceed as follows: 38, 39, 40, 50, 75, one 
dollar, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 dollars. Again, practice is provided on worksheet exercises and through 
hands-on activities, such as a classroom store.
Counting Change When purchasing an item in a store, the student should use a strategy 
that allows her to figure out the coins to give as quickly as possible. We recommend that students begin counting with the largest valued coins. For example, if a student has an assortment 
of coins and wants to buy something costing 280, the fastest way to count the exact amount is 
to use a quarter and three pennies. We recommend that the teacher introduce the rule “When
FIGURE 12.7 Worksheet on equivalent change 

266 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
you count to reach an exact amount of money, you start with the coins that are worth the most.” 
Next, the teacher models several examples and then gives students problems to solve. The steps 
for teaching this skill appear in Part A of Format 12.10: Counting Coins to Reach an Exact 
Amount. Because most cash registers display the exact amount of change to give, this procedure 
also can be used to teach students to count change as a store clerk would.
A mistake often made by students is inappropriately allocating only pennies for the value 
of the ones. For example, when counting out 380, students might count out 300 using a quarter 
and a nickel and then count out eight pennies instead of using a quarter (25), a dime (35), and 
3 pennies. One way to prompt students to use larger coins when possible is to limit the number of pennies they are given during practice exercises, thereby forcing students to use nickels 
and dimes. Often, students will not have the appropriate coins to allow them to count an exact 
amount. For these situations, students must be taught to count an amount that exceeds the purchase price. Part B of Format 12.10 teaches students to make a purchase when they don’t have 
the exact amount of change.
Decimal Notation in Money
Money problems expressed in decimal notation generally are introduced in third grade. A typical problem may state the following: A toy costs 390. You have a $5 bill. How much change 
should you receive? The solution is computed by subtracting 390 from $5 and is expressed as 
$4.61. Note that decimal notation for money is typically introduced before more comprehensive 
decimal instruction is taught so that students are able to solve real-world problems, like the 
one above. The students can be told that the two numerals to the right of the decimal tell about 
cents, while the numerals to the left of the decimal tell about dollars. A format for teaching students to read and write dollar figures expressed with decimal notation appears in Format 12.11: 
Decimal Notation for Money. Part A of the format involves teaching students to read decimal 
notation, while Part B teaches students to write decimal notation.
Practice should include examples without dollars ($.45, $.30) and examples without cents 
($5.00, $13.00). Students can be expected to have difficulty writing amounts between 1 and 
9 cents because of the need to place a zero after the decimal: $7.03, $14.08. These examples, 
therefore, should not be introduced in the initial exercises. Concentrated practice on this type 
of example should be provided in later lessons. At that time, the teacher explains that there 
must always be two digits after the decimal when writing dollar amounts. The teacher then 
models that when the number of cents is below 10, a zero and then the digit for the number of 
cents are written.
Word problems with money expressed in decimal notation should be introduced when students can read and write decimal notation for money. A common type of word problem that 
deserves special attention is illustrated below:
Scout bought a shirt for $13.62. She gave the clerk a $20 bill. How much change will Scout 
receive?
Atticus had $6. He was given $7.50 for working in his neighbor’s yard. How much money 
does he have now?
In these problems, a dollar amount is expressed without cents after the decimal point. When 
working the problem, students must write the dollar amount with a decimal point and two zeros. 
The teacher should model the critical skill of aligning the numerals according to the decimal 
point before assigning students to work problems of this type independently.
DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION
*∙∙∙∙∙∙∙
Measurement, time, and money errors fall into the same categories as the errors for other mathematics topics: fact errors, component-skill errors, and strategy errors. Note that the remediation usually involves reviewing critical parts of the relevant formats and providing students with 
additional practice. Examples of common errors for measurement, time, and money are outlined 
in Figure 12.8, along with suggested remediation procedures.

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 267
FIGURE 12.8 Diagnosis and remediation of measurement, time, and money errors
Error Pattern
Measurement
12 yards = 4 feet 4jl2
Diagnosis
Remediation
Procedures
3 lbs. 15 oz.
+_____ 6 oz.
5 lbs. 1 oz.
Time
Students start counting by fives when 
touching the 12 
instead of saying 
"zero."
30 minutes after 1 45 minutes after 8
Students confuse 
the minute and hour 
hands.
15 minutes after 7 10 minutes after 4
Money
Jaleel pays for a candy bar that costs 79 
cents with the following coins:
Q, Q, D, D, P, Pf P, P, P, P, P, P, P
Keisha has 7 dollars. She buys a piece of 
candy for 5 cents. How much money does 
she have left?
$7.00
- .50
6.50
Student does not 
determine the appropriate operation when 
converting.
Present Format 12.2, 
Part B using customary units.
Student does not Present Format 12.4. 
rename customary 
units properly.
Student incorrectly 
applies the strategy of 
paying for something 
with coins of the highest value.
Student does not 
write 5 cents correctly.
Present Format 12.6.
Review Part B to 
determine minutes 
after the hour.
Present Format 12.6 
The teacher may 
initially elongate 
the minute hand to 
help students discriminate between 
the two hands.
Present Part A 
of Format 12.10, 
emphasizing the 
strategy of starting 
with the highest 
valued coins and 
using the fewest 
coins.
Present Format 
12.11, Part B.
Remediation 
Examples
Provide a set of 
examples in which 
students determine 
the appropriate 
operation.
Provide a mix of 
addition problems 
that do and do not 
require renaming 
customary units.
Provide worksheets 
with pictures of 
analog clocks and 
a space labeled 
"minutes after."
Proved worksheets 
with pictures of 
analog clocks and 
a space labeled 
"minutes after."
Present examples 
of paying for items 
by starting with 
the highest valued 
coins.
Present a set of 
examples that 
includes values 
that are less than 
10 cents.

268 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED i
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. Explain how measurement, time, and money are related.
2. Write a format for introducing the yard unit. Assume students have previously learned inches and 
feet, ounces and pounds. Include all five steps discussed in the text. For step 4, write six questions 
that you would ask your students.
3. Below are errors made by students on conversion tasks. For each error, tell the probable cause and 
specify a remediation procedure.
7
Julio: 6 feet = 75 inches 7 2
× 6
75
Jamika: 6 feet — 60 inches 70
× 6
60
Joelle: 9 yards = 3 feet
4. A student says the x is over the line that shows 1¾ inches. Specify the wording in the correction 
made by the teacher.
5. Specify the wording in the correction to be made by the teacher.
1 foot 7 inches
+8 inches
2 faet 5 incited
6. For each error, tell the probable cause and specify what the teacher says to correct.
Junior: 148 meters equal_______ km ÷ 7000 = 7.48
Flo: 148 meters equal_______ km 748 × 7000 = 748r000
7. Write a structured-worksheet presentation to lead students through working this problem. 348 centimeters = how many meters?
8. Below are sets of examples prepared by teachers to use in initial exercises to teach telling time as 
minutes after the hour. Which sets are inappropriate and why?
Set A: 15 minutes after 8
10 minutes after 9
10 minutes after 7
5 minutes after 7
Set B: 13 minutes after 2
37 minutes after 10
25 minutes after 4
10 minutes after 9
SetC: 20 minutes after 7
15 minutes after 2
35 minutes after 4
30 minutes after δ

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 269
9. Tell the probable cause of each student’s error.
a. Jayde
30 minutes after 3 50 minutes after 8 10 minutes after 11
b. Iliya
50 minutes after 12 20 minutes after 9 35 minutes after 5
c. Xavi
30 minutes after 2 15 minutes after 8 50 minutes after 6
10. Specify the wording the teacher uses in correcting the first error made by each student in problem 8. 
The wording will be different for each student.
11. When counting a quarter, a dime, and two nickels, students count as specified below. Tell the probable cause of the errors. Specify what the teacher says to correct each student. (Assume students know 
the value of each coin.)
Justine—25, 30, 35, 40
Royce—5, 10, 20, 35
12. Tell the probable cause for each error. Specify what the teacher says to correct each student.
Sierra had 5 dollars. She buys a pencil for 4 cents. How much money does she have left?
Austin:
A 
^.00 
-.0⅛ 
$4.06
Lydia: 5
/

270 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.1
METRIC PREFIXES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Prefixes for Less Than 1
1. (Write the following prefixes on the board.)
milli- —thousandth of
centi- —hundredth of
deci- —tenth of
one whole
2. These are prefixes used in the metric system. They tell us how 
much of the base unit we have.
3. (Point to milli-, centi-, deci-.) These prefixes say there is less than 
one whole. What do these prefixes tell? There is less than one
4. (Point to milli-.) This says milli-. What does it say?
whole.
Milli
Milli means "a thousandth of." What does 
mi Hi- mean? A thousandth of
(Repeat step 3 with centi-, and deci-.)
5. Let's read all of these prefixes and what they mean. 
(Point to milli-, centi-, deci-.)
6. (Erase the words thousandth of, hundredth of, 
tenth of.) Milli
(Point to milli-.) What is this prefix? A thousandth of
What does milli- mean? Centi
(Point to centi-.) What is this prefix? A hundredth of
What does centi- mean? Deci
(Point to deci-.) What is this prefix? A tenth of
What does deci- mean?
(Point to the three prefixes in random order until students identify all 
three correctly.)
Part B: Introducing Prefixes (More Than One Whole)
1. (Write the following prefixes on the board.)
millicentidecione whole
deka- —ten wholes
hecto- —one hundred wholes
kilo- —one thousand wholes
2. What does milli- mean? A thousandth of
What does centi- mean? A hundredth of
What does deci- mean? A tenth of

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 271
TEACHER STUDENTS
3. Let's read the prefixes that tell about more than a whole.
(Point to deka-.) This says deka-. What does it say? Deka
What does deka- mean? 10 wholes
(Point to hecto-.) This says hecto-. What does it say? Hecto
What does hecto- mean? 100 wholes
(Point to kilo-.) This says kilo-. What does it say? Kilo
What does kilo- mean?
(Erase the words: ten wholes, hundred wholes, thousand wholes.)
1,000 wholes
4. (Point to deka-.) What does this say? Deka
What does deka- mean?
(Repeat step 3 with hecto- and kilo-.)
5. (Point to the prefixes in random order until students can identify them 
all correctly.)
Part C: Structured Board Presentation
10 wholes
1. What does kilo- mean?
2. Kilo- means 1000 wholes. So kilometer means "1,000 meters." What
1000 wholes
does kilometer mean? 1000 meters
Yes, a kilometer equals 1000 meters. Say that.
(Repeat steps 1 and 2 with millimeter, hectogram, centigram.)
A kilometer equals 1000 
meters.
3. What does deciliter mean?
To correct: What does deci- mean? (Repeat step 3.)
(Repeat step 3 with the following examples.)
dekaliter—10 liters
centigram—a hundredth of a gram
kiloliter—1000 liters
dekagram—10 grams
centiliter—hundredth of a liter
Part D: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like the ones below.)
a. A kilogram equals
1,000 grams .001 gram 100 grams
b. A millimeter equals
1,000 meters .001 meters .01 meters
c. A centigram equals
100 grams .001 grams .01 grams
d. A hectoliter equals
.01 liters .1 liters 10 liters 100 liters
A tenth of a liter
2. Look at problem a. You have to circle what a kilogram equals. What 
does kilo- mean?
A thousand wholes
So what does a kilogram equal?
3. Circle the answer.
(Repeat steps 2 and 3 with several examples.)
A thousand grams

272 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.2
METRIC CONVERSIONS
TEACHER
Part A: Relative Sizes of Units
1. (Write the following chart on the board.)
milligram centigram decigram gram dekagram hectogram kilogram 
1 1 1
W00gm 100gm 10gm 1gm 10gm 100gm 1000gm
2. These are the metric units for measuring weight. Milligram is a 
thousandth of a gram. It is the smallest unit. What is the smallest unit?
Kilogram is a thousand whole grams. It is the biggest unit.
What is the biggest unit?
3. (Start at gram and point to the left.) If we move this way, we're 
changing to a smaller unit.
(Point to the right.) If we move this way, we're changing to a 
bigger unit.
4. (Point to the left.) Which way am I changing?
(Point to the right.) Which way am I changing?
5. (Point to centigram.) If we have centigrams and we want to 
change to grams, which way are we changing?
(Repeat step 4 with grams to kilograms, grams to milligrams, 
hectograms to grams, kilograms to grams, grams to decigrams.)
6. (Erase the board.) I want to change centigrams to grams.
What does a centigram equal?
When I change centigrams to grams, which way are we changing? 
(Repeat step 6 with same examples as in step 5.)
w
Part B: Determining Appropriate Operations
1. Here are two important rules: When we change to a bigger unit, 
we divide. Say that.
When we change to a smaller unit, we multiply. Say that.
2. What do we do when we change to a bigger unit?
What do we do when we change to a smaller unit?
3. (Write on board: gram to centigram.) When we change from grams to 
centigrams, are we changing to a bigger unit or a smaller unit?
Do we multiply or divide when we change from grams to centigrams?
To correct: If we have grams and we change to centigrams, which 
way are we changing? If we change to a smaller unit, what do 
we do?
(Repeat step 3 with these examples: g to kg, g to mg, hg to g, kg to g, 
g to dg.)
(See Videos Parts B & C)
STUDENTS
Milligram
Kilogram
To a smaller unit
To a bigger unit
To a bigger unit
A hundredth of a gram
To a bigger unit
When we change to a bigger 
unit, we divide.
When we change to a 
smaller unit, we multiply.
Divide
Multiply
To a small unit
Multiply

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 273
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part C: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
350 centigrams =_______grams
2. This problem says, 350 centigrams equals how many grams? We're Changing centrigrams to
changing centigrams to grams. What are we doing? grams
3. Are we changing to a bigger or smaller unit? Bigger
4. We're changing to a bigger unit, so do we multiply or divide?
Yes, when we change to a bigger unit, we divide.
Divide
5. How many centigrams in each gram?
So we divide by 100. Let's divide by moving the decimal. When we
100
divide by 100, what do we do to the decimal?
6. (Write 350 next to grams.) If I move the decimal point two places to
Move it to the left 2 places
the left, where will it be?
(Write on board: 350 centigrams = 350 grams)
Between the 3 and 5
7. Read the problem now.
(Repeat steps 1-5 with the problems below.)
314 grams =_______milligrams
(Move decimal point 3 places to right.)
315 grams =_______kilograms
(Move decimal point 3 places to left.)
7 centigrams =_______grams
(Move decimal point 2 places to left.)
18 kilograms =_______grams
(Move decimal point 3 places to right.)
30 meters =_______decimeters
(Move decimal point 1 place to right.)
Part D: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like the one below.) 
a. 232 centiliters equal_____liters
350 eg = 3.5 g
2. Read problem a. Are you changing to a bigger or smaller unit? Bigger
3. So do you multiply or divide? Divide
4. What do you divide by? 100
Which way do you move the decimal point? To the left
How many places do you move it?
5. Write the answer. (Monitor responses.)
Two
Read the problem.
(Repeat steps 2-5 with remaining problems.)
232 centiliters = 2.32 liters

274 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.3
CONVERTING FROM MIXED NUMBERS
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Write the following problems on the board.)
a. 3 feet 4 inches =_______inches
b. 2 weeks 3 days =______ days
c. 2 pounds 3 ounces =_______ounces
d. 3 gallons 1 quart =_______quarts
2. Read problem a. This problem asks us to change 
3 feet 4 inches into inches in all. First we'll find 
how many inches in 3 feet. Then we'll add it to 
4 inches.
(Write in. + over first problem.)
in.+
3 feet 4 inches =_______inches
What do we do first? Find how many inches are in 3 feet
Then what do we do? Add 4 inches
3. Let's change 3 feet to inches. Are we changing 
to a bigger or smaller unit? Smaller
So what do we do? Multiply
4. How many inches in a foot? 12
So you'll multiply by 12. Everybody, how many 
inches in 3 feet? 36
Cross out 3 feet and write 36 above it.
5. Now what do we do? Add it to 4 inches
6. How many inches in all? 40
Write it in front of inches.
7. Read the problem. 3 feet 4 inches = 40 inches
(Repeat with additional examples.)
Format 12.4
RENAMING CUSTOMARY UNITS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following problem on the board, with blanks for the ounces.)
3 lbs_______oz
+2 lbs______ oz
__ lbs_______ oz
2. First, we add the ounces; then we add the pounds. How many ounces in a pound? 
That means that if we end up with 16 or more ounces, we have to rename.
3. I'll write numerals for ounces. Tell me if we have to rename.
16

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 275
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. (Write 7 and 5 in the blanks.)
What's the answer for ounces? 12
Do we have to rename 12 ounces as pounds? No
(Repeat steps 3 and 4 with 9 + 9, 9 + 5, 8 + 9, 8 + 8, 9 + 6.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with 8-10 problems such as the ones below.)
5 lb 9 oz l 4lb 2oz
3 b' +3 lb 9 oz ’ +3 lb 11 oz
2. Touch problem a. Read The Problem. 5 pounds
3. We start by adding ounces.
4. What is 9 + 9?
9 ounces plus
3 pounds
9 ounces
18
Write 18 under the line.
5. How many ounces in a pound? 16
6. Do we rename 18 ounces as pounds? Yes
7. Cross out 18 and write a 1 over the pounds column.
8. We had 18 ounces. We put a pound in the pounds column. How many ounces did we 
take from 18 ounces when we renamed? 16
To correct: A pound has 16 ounces.
9. We had 18 ounces; we moved 16 ounces. How many ounces are left? 2 ounces
Write 2 under the ounces.
10. Now add the pounds. How many pounds? 9 pounds
11. Read the whole answer. 9 pounds
(Repeat steps 1-11 with additional problems.)
2 ounces
Format 12.5
SUBTRACTION WITH RENAMING
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
5 lb 2 oz
-2 lb 9 oz
2. Read the problem.
3. Can you start with 2 ounces and subtract 9 ounces?
4. You must rename. Cross out 5 pounds and write 4.
5. We took one pound from five pounds. How many 
ounces in a pound?
5 lb 2 oz minus 2 lb 9 oz
No
16
continued

276 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.5 (continued)
SUBTRACTION WITH RENAMING
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. Write 16 + in front of the 2 ounces.
7. How many ounces do we start with now?
8. Cross out 16 + 2 and write 18 above it.
9. And what does 18-9 equal?
So how many ounces do you end up with?
Write it.
10. How many pounds do you end up with?
Write it.
11. What's the answer?
(Repeat with additional examples.)
18
9
9 ounces
2 pounds
2 lb 9 oz
Format 12.6
EXPRESSING TIME AS MINUTES AFTER THE HOUR
(UNITS OF 5 MINUTES)______________________ __
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Determining the Hour
1. (Draw the following clock on the board.)
2. One of the hands is missing on this clock. (Point to the 
hour hand.) This short hand is the hour hand. What is the 
short hand?
3. Let's figure out what hour the hand is after. We start at the 
top of the clock and say the numbers until we come to the 
hour hand. I'll touch; you say the numbers. Say stop when 
I come to the hour hand. (Starting with 12, touch each 
numeral and then the hour hand as the children say the numbers.)
4. What was the last numeral I touched?
5. The hour hand is after 5. So, the hour is after 5. Tell me 
about the hour.
(Repeat steps 1-5 with after 8.)
6. (Point the hour hand to after 5.) Now let's figure out the 
hour a fast way, without counting. Look at the clock. 
What numeral is the hour hand after?
So tell me about the hour.
(Repeat step 6 with several more examples: after 9, 
after 2, after 6, after 3, after 10.)
The hour hand
12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, stop
5
After 5
5
After 5

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 277
TEACHER
Part B: Minutes After the Hour
1. (Draw the following clock on the board.)
STUDENTS
2. This long hand is the minute hand. What is the long hand called?
The minute hand is very funny. It tells you to count by 5. What 
does the minute hand tell you to do?
3. Watch me figure out the minutes. (Point to the minute hand.)
I touch the top of the clock and say zero. Then I count by 5 until
I come to the minute hand. (Touch the clock above 12.) Zero.
(Starting with 1, touch each numeral as you count: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25.)
4. Tell me about the minutes.
5. Your turn. I'll touch the numerals; you count by 5. Remember to 
say zero when I touch the top of the clock. (Touch the clock 
above 12 and then touch each numeral as the children count.)
6. Tell me about the minutes.
Yes, 25 minutes.
(Repeat steps 4-6 with five more examples: hand points to 3, 
hand points to 7, hand points to 2, hand points to 10, hand 
points to 4.)
Part C: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Draw the following clock on the board.)
The minute hand
Count by 5
25 minutes
0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25
25 minutes
2. We're going to figure out what time this clock shows. First we'll 
figure out the minutes. Then we'll figure out the hour.
3. First the minutes. Which hand is the minute hand, the
short hand or the long hand?
4. What does the minute hand tell you to count by?
Where do you start counting?
What do you say?
(Repeat steps 3 and 4 until all questions are answered correctly.)
5. Count by 5 to the minute hand. (Touch the top of the clock 
and then the numerals as the children count.)
How many minutes?
I'll write the answer. (Write 15 minutes under the clock.)
The long hand
Count by 5
At the top of the clock 
Zero
0, 5, 10, 15
15
continued

278 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.6 (continued)
EXPRESSING TIME AS MINUTES AFTER THE HOUR
(UNITS OF 5 MINUTES)
TEACHER
6. We know it's 15 minutes, but we don't know about the hour. 
Look at the hour hand. Tell me about the hour.
7. Yes, after 6. I'll write the answer. (Write after 6.) That's the time the clock 
shows, 15 minutes after 6. What time does the clock show? Say the time. 
(Repeat steps 1-7 with 5 minutes after 7, 45 minutes after 4, 20 minutes 
after 2, 25 minutes after 10.)
Part D: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet that includes about six to eight clocks 
like those above.)
STUDENTS
After 6
15 minutes after 6
minutes after minutes after--------2. Everyone touch the first clock on your worksheet. First you'll figure 
out the minutes, then you'll figure out the hour.
3. Which is the minute hand?
What does the minute hand tell you to count by?
Where do you start counting?
What do you say at the top of the clock?
Let's figure out the minutes.
4. Touch the 12. Count and touch as I clap. (Clap once each second.)
How many minutes?
Write 35 in front of the word "minutes."
5. Touch the hour hand. Tell me about the hour.
Yes, it says after 4. Write 4 in the next space.
6. Now tell me what time that clock says.
(Repeat steps 2-6 with each remaining clock.)
Part E: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give the students a worksheet with problems like the one below.)
The long hand
Count by 5
At the top of the clock 
zero
0, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35
35 minutes
After 4
35 minutes after 4
minutes after---------2. Touch clock a. You're going to figure out the time and write it under the clock.
3. Figure out the minutes and write the minutes in the first blank (Monitor 
responses.) How many minutes?
4. Now figure the hour and write it in the last blank.
5. Read what time the clock says.
20
20 minutes after 6

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 279
continued
Format 12.7
EXPRESSING TIME AS MINUTES BEFORE THE HOUR
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Determining the Hour
1. (Draw the following clock on the board.)
/10 2∖
∣9 κ 31
∖8 V
2. In telling time, you've learned to say how many minutes 
after the hour. Another way of telling time is to say the 
number of minutes before the hour.
3. Look at this clock. What hour is it after?
4. The next bigger number tells you the hour it's before. Tell me 
the hour it's before.
Yes, it's before 5. What is the hour?
5. (Move the hour hand between 7 and 8.) Tell me the hour 
by saying what hour it is before.
(Repeat step 5 moving the hand to five more positions: 
between 2 and 3, between 10 and 11, between 6 and 7, 
between 11 and 12, between 12 and 1.)
Part B: Minutes Before the Hour
1. (Draw the following clock on the board.)
∕ιo 2∖
19 >, 31
∖8^ * 4∕
Vey
2. Now we'll figure out the minutes before the next hour. 
When we figure the minutes before the hour, we start 
at the 12 but we count this way (Points) until we 
get to the minute hand. My turn: 0, 5, 10, 15, 20. It's 
20 minutes before. How many minutes before?
3. Show me which way you count to figure the minutes 
before the hour. Where do we start counting?
What do we say first?
(Move minute hand to 10.) Tell me how many minutes before.
To correct: We're figuring out minutes before, so we count 
this way (<r"). I'll touch, you count.
(Repeat step 3 with four more examples: hand pointing 
to 10, 8, 11, 7.)
4
5
Before 5
Before 8
20 minutes before
At the 12
Zero
10 minutes before

280 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.7 (continued)
EXPRESSING TIME AS MINUTES BEFORE THE HOUR
TEACHER
Part C: Structured Board Presentation
STUDENTS
1. (Draw the following clock on the board.)
minutes before
2. Let's tell what time this clock says by telling how many 
minutes before the hour.
3. (Point to the hour hand.) Which hand is this?
What hour is it before?
4. (Write 4. Point to minute hand.) Which hand is this?
How many minutes before 4 is it?
(Write 20.)
To correct: Show me which way we count when we figure 
out minutes before. Count as I point.
5. What time does the clock say?
(Repeat steps 1-5 with additional times: 5 before 2, 25 
before 8, 15 before 11,10 before 12, 20 before 5.)
Part D: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with six to eight clocks.
Under each clock is written minutes before.)
2. Let's find out what time these clocks say by finding 
out how many minutes before the hour.
3. Find the hour hand on clock a. What hour is it before?
4. Now let's find out how many minutes before 8. Start 
at the top of the clock—remember which way to count. 
How many minutes before 8?
5. What time does this clock say?
Fill in the blanks.
(Repeat with remaining examples.)
The hour hand
4
The minute hand
20 minutes
20 minutes before 4
Before 8
20 minutes
20 minutes before 8

Chapter 12 Measurement Time, and Money 281
Format 12.8
COIN EQUIVALENCIES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Counting Similar Coins
1. (Show students real or pretend coins.) I want to find out 
how many nickels equal one dime. How much is a dime worth?
So I count nickels until I get to 10. What do I count by 
when I count nickels?
Stop me when I get to 10. 5,10...
How many nickels did I count?
So how many nickels equal one dime?
(Repeat step 1 to provide additional practice in counting similar coins to 
demonstrate equivalencies.)
2. (Review previously taught equivalencies.)
How many pennies in a nickel?
How many nickels in a dime?
How many pennies in a dime?
Part B: Counting Mixed Coins
I gave a friend a quarter and he gave me two dimes and a nickel. Let's figure out 
if these coins are worth the same as a quarter. How much is a quarter worth?
Let's count the coins and see if they're worth 25c. I'll touch. You count. 
(Touch each dime and then the nickel as the students count.)
Are those coins worth 25c?
(Repeat Part B with additional equivalency problems with mixed coins.)
10 cents
5
Stop
2
2
25 cents
10, 20, 25
Yes
Format 12.9
VERIFYING CHANGE
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Write the following on the board.)
36¢ PP P P D Q Q
2. (Point to P.) This stands for penny.
(Point to D.) This stands for dime.
(Point to Q.) This stands for quarter.
(Point to each letter in random order and ask,) What does this 
stand for?
3. (Point to 36<t.) John bought apples that cost 36c. He gave the 
cashier a dollar. We're going to count the change John got and 
see if it's right. We'll count from 36 and see if we end with a dollar.
(Point to P.) What do we count by for these?
(Point to D.) What do we count by for this?
(Point to Q.) What do we count by for these?
4. Let's count the change. Start with 36—count. (Point to
letters as students count.)
Did we end with a dollar?
(Repeat steps 1-4 with several more examples.)
1
10
25
37, 38, 39, 40, 50, 75, 100
Yes

282 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 12.10
COUNTING COINS TO REACH AN EXACT AMOUNT
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Choosing the Correct Coins
(Have coins ready for each student to use.)
1. Today you're each going to count out money. I'll tell you how 
much something costs and you count out the money to buy 
it. When you count to reach an exact amount of money, you 
start with the coins that are worth the most so you can use the 
fewest number of coins. If I want to buy something for 25c,
would I use 25 pennies or 1 quarter? 1 quarter
Why?
Right, a quarter is worth more than a penny. If I want to buy
A quarter is worth more than a 
penny.
something that costs 20c, would I use nickels or dimes? Dimes
Why?
2. My turn. I want to buy a balloon that costs 31c. I start 
with a quarter: 25, 30, 31. (Write Q N P on board.)
3. Your turn. (Pass out coins.) A toy car costs 28c. Start
A dime is worth more than a nickel.
with the coin that's worth the most and count out 28c
(Monitor student responses.)
(Repeat step 3 with several more examples.)
Part B: Counting Coins When You Don't Have the Exact Amount
1. I'm going to use the coins 1 have to buy something 
that costs 56c.
(Write 56¢. Below, write Q Q Q D D D.)
This is all the money 1 have to use. 1 start with the coin 
that has the greatest value. 1 get as close as 1 can. If 1 
don't have the exact amount, 1 have to give more. I'll 
get the extra money back as change. Watch.
(Circle a coin each time you count: Q, Q, and D.)
25, 50, 60.
1 paid more than 56c, so I'll get some change back.
(Give the students a worksheet with problems like the 
following.)
a. 36< Q D D N
b. 72< Q D D D N N P
c. 29¢ D D D N N P P
2. Your turn. Point to problem a on your worksheet.
Start with the coin worth the most. If you don't have exactly 
36c, count more than 36. Circle the coins you'll use. Raise your 
hand when you're done.
Students should put out a quarter 
and three pennies.
(When most hands are raised) Tell me the coins you circled.
3. (Repeat step 2 with the remaining problems.)
Q, D, N

Chapter 12 Measurement, Time, and Money 283
Format 12.11
DECIMAL NOTATION FOR MONEY
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Reading Decimal Notation
1. (Write the following on the board.)
$4.32
2. Here is the way to write dollars and cents. (Point to the decimal 
point in $4.32.) This dot is a decimal point. It divides dollars and 
cents. (Point to 4.) This tells us four dollars. (Point to 32.) These 
two numbers tell us about cents. I'll read the amount: Four 
dollars and thirty-two cents.
3. (Write the following on the board.)
$3.62
How many dollars? 3 dollars
How many cents? 62 cents
Say the whole amount. $3.62
(Repeat step 3 with $7.20, $.45*, $6.00, $.30*.)
*For examples with no dollars, the teacher should model the 
response on the first day the format appears.
Part B: Writing with Decimal Notation
1. (Give each student a sheet of lined paper.) You're going to write 
money amounts using a dollar sign and a decimal point.
2. Listen: Eight dollars and thirty-two cents. Say that. $8.32
How many dollars? 8 dollars
Write a dollar sign, then an 8.
3. Eight dollars and thirty-two cents. How many cents? 32 cents
Write a decimal point on the line. Then write 32.
4. What amount did you write? $8.32
(Repeat steps 2-4 with these examples: $6.42, $.32, $4.10, $7.00, 
$.57, and $9.00.)
