Direct Instruction Mathematics (5th ed.), Stein, Kinder, Silbert & Carnine — Chapter: Fractions

Chapter
13
Fractions
LEARNING OUTCOMES
13.1 Explain how instruction in fractions is organized around three major areas to 
illustrate the interrelationships among various fraction skills.
13.2 Discuss the recommended procedures for teaching fraction analysis to promote 
conceptual understanding of fractions to young students.
13.3 Explain the importance of teaching students rewriting strategies as a 
prerequisite for fractions operations and the role equivalent fractions plays in 
the rewriting strategies.
13.4 Outline instructional strategies to teach addition and subtraction of fractions 
with like and unlike denominators.
13.5 Outline instructional strategies to teach multiplication and division of fractions, 
including word problems.
13.6 Describe diagnosis and remediation procedures for common fraction errors.
SKILL HIERARCHY
• ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
We have included a Skill Hierarchy Chart in this chapter because fractions comprise one of the 
most complex sets of skills covered in elementary mathematics. This complexity is understandable, since the entire range of operations discussed in other sections of the book is applicable 
to fractional numbers. Unfortunately, fractions do not represent a simple extension of familiar 
skills. While early instruction on whole numbers covers counting by groups of 1 or more than 1, 
that instruction does not help students generalize to groups of less than one. In addition and subtraction of whole numbers, members of a second group relate to the members of the first group 
based on one-to-one correspondences. For example, in the problem 4 + 3, students increase 
the first set in units of 1 (5, 6, 7), producing the answer 7. To solve 4 — 3, students decrease the 
first set in units of 1, producing the answer 1. In contrast, in multiplication and division of whole 
numbers, a second group is related to the first group based on a one-to-many correspondence. 
For example, in solving for 8 × 2, students count units of 8 for each member of the second 
group (8, 16), producing the answer 16. In 16 ÷ 2, students determine the answer by counting 1 
for each unit of 2 in 16 (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8), producing the answer 8.

Chapter 13 Fractions 285
In operations containing fractions, the one-to-one and one-to-many correspondences involve 
fractional numbers. For example, to solve ⅜ × 4 students count units of ⅔ for each member of 
the second group. While students can quickly learn to count 2, 4, 6, 8 for 2 × 4, counting ⅔, ⅝, 
⅝, ⅝, for ⅜ × 4 is not easy. The problem ⅜ X 4½ is even less comprehensible because students 
have no experience counting ⅜ths times. Therefore, learning fractional correspondences with 
both whole numbers and other fractions requires instruction in new strategies.
Another major difficulty with fractions is the incompatibility of different units. Addition 
and subtraction can be carried out only with equivalent units. Whole numbers represent a simple 
type of equivalent unit, so they can be added and subtracted in any combination. In contrast, 
fractional numbers do not represent one type of unit: all thirds represent equivalent units and all 
fourths represent equivalent units, but thirds are not the same as fourths. Consequently, thirds 
and fourths cannot be added or subtracted as such. Prior to adding or subtracting fractions, the 
fractional units must be transformed into a common unit:
1 1 _ 3 8 _ 11
4 3 12 12 ^ 12
The necessity to transform or rewrite fractional numerals is a major source of difficulty in 
teaching fractions. (This is one reason for the appeal of decimals; they have the uniform base of 
multiples of 10.)
Instruction in fractions can be organized around the three main fraction topics outlined in 
the Skill Hierarchy: fraction analysis, rewriting fractions, and operations (addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, and division).
Since application of fraction skills depends on an understanding of fractional numbers, initial instruction on fraction concepts and conventions is critical. Early instruction must address 
fraction analysis skills such as constructing diagrams or figures to represent fractions, writing 
the fraction represented by diagrams or figures, decoding fractions, and determining if a fraction 
is proper or improper.
The second area, rewriting fractions, includes the following skills:
1. Rewriting an improper fraction as a mixed numeral: 1⅜ = 6½
2. Rewriting a proper fraction using the smallest possible denominator (reducing fractions): 
⅝ = ¾
3. Rewriting a fraction as an equivalent fraction: ⅜ = 4∕□
4. Rewriting a mixed numeral as an improper fraction: 2½ = ⅝
The third area, fraction operations, often requires students to use the fraction rewriting skills described above. For example, to work the problem ¾ + ⅝, the student must 
rewrite ¾ and ⅝ as equivalent fractions with the same denominator: ¾ = 9∕12 and ⅝ = 10∕12. 
The equivalent fractions 10∕12 and 9∕12 are then added to produce a sum of 19∕12, which may be 
converted to the mixed numeral l7∕12. When working the problem ⅝ × 1¾, the student first 
must convert the mixed numeral 1¾ to the improper fraction ¾. The student then multiplies 
4∕5 × ¾, ending with a product of 2½0, which may be converted to the mixed numeral l8∕20. 
The fraction part of this mixed numeral may be reduced so that the final answer reads 1⅜.
The Skill Hierarchy Chart illustrates the interrelationships among the three areas of fraction skills. Note that many of the fractions skills on the chart are preskills for other skills. 
A sequence for teaching fractions must be designed so that all preskills for advanced problems have been presented before that type of problem is introduced. Note also how the focus 
of instruction is cyclical. For example, simple addition and subtraction problems involving 
fractions with like denominators are introduced at a relatively early stage in the sequence of 
instruction. Problems involving adding and subtracting fractions with unlike denominators are 
not introduced until significantly later in the sequence because several rewriting skills must 
be taught first. The Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart suggests one possible order 
for introducing the important types of fraction problems. Teachers working with intermediate 
students will find it productive to test for and teach, when necessary, the skills appearing at the 
beginning of the sequence chart, since these skills lay the foundation for a conceptual understanding of fractions.

286 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
ω ⊂ o +≡ 
S 
φ α O
□)
5 φ
c o 
"δ s
ω ⊂ o
S
φ
Q O

Chapter 13 Fractions 287
E
□ (D J
'ω ∈ ⊂ ω -j — φ ⊂ ⊂ 
ατ5 £ 
s ® ⊂ φ × ⅛
⅛

288 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
1 Identifying fractions that 
correspond to diagrams
a. Circle the picture that shows ¾.
b. Circle the picture that shows z¼.
c. Put X on the line below the picture that shows ⅜.
d. Put X on the line below the picture that shows ⅜.
Drawing diagrams to 
correspond to fractions

Chapter 13 Fractions 289
Grade
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
continued
Level Problem Type
Reading and writing fractions 
expressed as fractions
Performance Indicator
Write these fractions:
a. two-thirds = —
b. five-halves = —
c. four-fifths =
2 4 5(Test students individually. "What does this say: — — —?")3 5 2
Determining whether a fraction is more than, equal to, 
or less than 1
Write more than, less than, or equal to in each blank.
5ιs------------------- ,
7ιs-------------------'
l,s------------------,
Adding and subtracting fractions with like denominators
3 _ 2 =
5 5
4_ 2 =
7 7
3 1----- 1----- —
5 5
Reading and writing mixed 
numerals
Write two and one-third__________
Write four and two-fifths__________
Write six and one-half__________
(Test students individually. "Read these numerals:
Writing a fraction as an equivalent to one whole group '=7 1=7
Multiplying fractions
I I I I I I
c x ι ∣ m m ∣ m ∩ ∩ ∣ l∩ 
× × ×
m ∣ l∩ rx∣ ∣ l∩ cxι I cxι
Adding and subtracting 
mixed numbers: fractions 
with like denominators
4-2-—
⅛-'l------------------Word problems: adding and 
subtracting mixed numbers 
and fractions with the same 
denominator
Bill ran 2¾ miles on Monday and 3¼ miles on Tuesday. How many miles 
did he run altogether?__________ miles
Jack had 42∕s pounds of nails. Bill had 2⅜ pounds of nails. How much more 
did Jack have?__________ pounds of nails
Bob worked 2½ hours on Monday and 3 hours on Tuesday. How many 
hours did he work altogether?__________ hours

290 Par i Ill Extended Concepts and Skills
Grade Level
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART (continued)
Problem Type Performance Indicator
Rewriting fractions as mixed 12 _
numerals 5
8 _
3
21 _
9
Rewriting whole numerals as 
fractions 9 = F 6 = F 8 = H
Multiplying fractions by a 
whole number
∣ × 6 ∣× 12
∣ × 20
Multiplying fractions by 
whole numerals and
| X 14 y X 8
converting answers to 2 _
mixed numerals - × 15 9
Word problems: multiplying There are 15 children in class. Two-thirds are boys. How many boys
fractions by whole numerals in the class?
Jack has to study for 30 hours. He has done half of the studying. 
How many hours did he study?
Ann's coach told her to run ¾ of a mile a day. How many miles will 
she run in 5 days?
Rewriting fractions as 2 = □
equivalent fractions with 5 10
larger denominators 3 =n
4 12
2 = □
3 9
Finding the least common Find the least common multiple of 6 and 4_____ _____
multiple of two small numbers Find the least common multiple of 5 and 10__________
Find the least common multiple of 5 and 2__________
Adding and subtracting 3 _ 2 = □
fractions with unlike 4 3 “ □
denominators 2 3 = □
5 + 10 “ □
1 _ 1 _ □
2 3 “ □□ ∣□ 
I I
V - I C M 
+
CM ∣ LO
Converting mixed numerals 
to improper fractions
21=° 
4 4
3l-□32 ^ 2
13 _□
5 5

Chapter 13 Fractions 291
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
4 Subtracting mixed numerals
from whole numerals
I I II I I
rx ι ∣ c n m ∣ l∩ ∣ γm
v- cm ,× r
I I I
o o c n
5 Comparing value of fractions Which is greater:
continued
2 4τ
3°r5'cm I ∞ ∣ rx ι
δ δ
∣ L Π fN ∣
5 Word problems: adding and 
subtracting fractions with 
unlike denominators
Bill painted ½ of the wall. Jane painted ¼ of the wall. How much of the 
wall have they painted altogether?
Tom ate ⅛ of the pie, and Jack ate ½ of the pie. How much of the pie did 
they eat?
5 Determining all factors of a 
given number
Write all the numerals for the factors of 12. Write all the numerals for the 
factors of 8.
5 Determining the greatest 
common factor
What is the greatest common factor of 8 and 12? What is the greatest common factor of 4 and 8? What is the greatest common factor of 12 and 15?
5 Reducing a fraction to its 
simplest terms
Reduce these fractions to their simplest terms:
12 = □
18 ~ □
16 = □
20 ~ □
A= □
18 □
5 Adding fractions, reducing 
and converting to mixed 
numerals
Add these fractions; reduce the answers to simplest terms. Write answers as 
mixed numerals.
4 2
6 + 5
2 2
4 + 3
6 4 =
10 5
5 Finding the lowest common 
multiple of three numbers
Find the lowest common multiple of 3, 6, and 4. Find the lowest common 
multiple of 2, 4, and 5. Find the lowest common multiple of 2, 5, and 10.
5 Adding and subtracting 
three fractions with different 
denominators
Add these fractions and write the answers with fractions written in simplest 
terms:
3 1 3
5 + 2 + 6
2 2 1
3 + 4 + 6
3 1 2
4 + 2 + 5
5 Multiplying mixed numerals -,3 J
74×⅛ =-----------------2∣ × 4 =__________
5×⅛ =-----------------
292 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART (continued)
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
5 Dividing fractions
. ∣ L U 
÷
I I N J 
I I
4 5
1 -1 =
6 3
7 1 _
5 Dividing fractions by whole 
numerals
9 3
∣÷4 =__________
3
j÷2 =__________
5
∣÷7 =__________
4
5 Dividing mixed numerals by 
whole numerals
3∣ ÷ 3 =__________
2
2∣÷2 =__________
5
7→ 4 = __________2
5 Word problems: division 
involving fractions
Two girls picked 5½ pounds of cherries. They want to split up the cherries 
equally. How much will each one get?
Bill has 35 inches of ribbon. He wants to make shorter ribbons. If each ribbon is ½" long, how many ribbons can he make?
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING
Teaching fraction analysis skills is designed to provide students the necessary conceptual understanding of fractions. Concurrently with fraction analysis skills, we recommend teaching common 
conventions for reading and writing fractions. In this text, fraction analysis skills and common conventions are introduced in first grade. Most students, by first grade, have had some experience with 
fractions, like ½ and ¼. Beginning carefully designed fraction instruction early capitalizes on the 
students’ prior knowledge and allows for a more efficient progression through all of the fraction- 
related skills. Our recommendation for beginning instruction in first grade takes into consideration 
the time necessary for students to achieve mastery of each of the preskills required for understanding more complex fraction operations. A solid understanding of fractions ensures that students are 
prepared for algebra. The skills included in this area are fisted below in their order of introduction:
1. Learning part/whole discrimination: Students learn to discriminate between whole units, the 
number of parts each unit is divided into, and the number of parts used.
2. Writing a numerical representation for a diagram or figure of whole units divided into 
equal-sized parts, and vice versa:
3. Reading fractions: ¾ is read as “three-fourths.”
4. Determining whether a fraction equals, exceeds, or is less than one whole.
5. Reading mixed fractional numerals: 3½ is “three and one-half.”
Unlike the instruction typical of most commercial programs, the instructional strategies in the 
fraction analysis section are designed to introduce proper and improper fractions concurrently. This 

Chapter 13 Fractions 293
feature prevents students from learning the misrule that all fractions are proper fractions. Without 
adequate instruction, struggling students often learn this misrule as a result of only being introduced to proper fractions in the earlier grades. This misrule can be seen when students who can 
successfully draw a picture of ¾ cannot draw a picture of ¾. By introducing proper and improper 
fractions at the same time, teachers show students that the analysis applies to all fractions.
A second important feature of the analysis section is that students are taught initially to 
interpret what the denominator and numerator represent (in ¾ the 4 tells “four parts in each 
whole unit,” and 3 tells “three parts are used”) rather than to read the fraction in the traditional 
way (¾ as “three-fourths”). This unique way of reading fractions enables students to interpret 
fractions and facilitates conceptual understanding.
Part-Whole Discrimination
Format 13.1: Introducing Fractions shows how to introduce fractions to students. The goal of 
the format is to teach basic fraction (part-whole) concepts through the use of number lines. The 
reason for working with number lines from the onset is to ensure that students relate fractions to 
whole numbers. The specific objective is to teach students to discriminate between the number 
of parts in each whole unit and the number of whole units.
In Part A of Format 13.1, the teacher introduces students to number lines and how to identify the denominator (“bottom number”) for fractions by counting the number of parts in each 
unit. Initially, each example set should include number lines with the same number of units 
divided into different numbers of parts. Each number line in the illustration below contains three 
units with each unit divided into a different number of parts. The first number line is divided 
into 4 parts per unit, the second number line is divided into 3 parts per unit, and the third number 
line is divided into 2 parts per unit.
Next, in Part B, the students learn to write the numerator and the denominator of fractions 
for whole numbers on number lines. The bottom numeral is the number of parts in each whole 
unit. That number is the same for all whole units on a number line. The top numeral is the 
number of parts from the beginning of the number line. While this procedure illustrates the relationship between fractions and whole numbers, note that the concept of fractions equal to one is 
explicitly taught later in the instructional sequence.
In Parts C and D, students are introduced to writing several fractions for each number line, 
including whole-number fractions. To figure out the fractions, students are taught to first count 

294 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
the number of parts in each unit and write the bottom numeral for all of the fractions on that 
number line. They then count the units from the beginning of each number line and write the top 
numeral for each of the fractions.
After students have worked with horizontal number lines for several days, teachers can 
introduce number lines that are vertically oriented. The procedure is the same. The number of 
parts in each unit is the bottom number of each fraction. The top number is the number of parts 
from the beginning of the number line.
After students have mastered identifying fractions using number lines, they work with 
figures, like circles or squares, that are divided into equal parts. Format 13.2: Part-Whole 
Discrimination teaches students to discriminate between the number of parts in each whole 
unit and the number of whole units using figures. In the format, the teacher writes a row of circles on the board and divides each into an equal number of parts. The teacher tells the students 
that each circle is called a whole unit and then leads the students through determining how 
many parts in each whole unit. Each example set should include a different number of circles. 
Also, the number of parts in each whole unit should vary from set to set. For example, the first 
set might include three circles, each divided into two parts. The next set might include five circles, each divided into four parts. This format should be presented for several consecutive days.
Some students may not see the relationship between the figures representing fractions and 
fractions on a number line. Therefore, using the same language when teaching the skills and correcting errors is critical. The teacher should stress the word each if students have problems with 
the figures, reminding them to count the parts in each whole unit.
Writing Numerical Fractions to Represent Figures
Exercises in which the students write a numerical fraction to represent a figure (¾) are presented 
after the students have mastered the part-whole concepts presented in Format 13.2: PartFormat 13.3A:
Writing Numerical
Fractions
Whole Discrimination. The format for writing numerical fractions appears in Format 13.3: 
Writing Numerical Fractions. In Part A, the structured board presentation, students learn that 
the bottom number of a fraction tells how many parts in each whole unit, while the top number 
of a fraction represents how many parts are used (shaded). Parts B and C are structured and less 
structured worksheet exercises in which the students fill in the numerals to represent a diagram. 
Daily practice is provided for several weeks, followed by intermittent review.
Two guidelines are important for appropriate example selection for this skill. First, the number of parts in each whole unit, the number of whole units, and the number of parts used should 
vary among examples. Second, the examples should include a mixture of proper and improper 
fractions as well as some fractions that equal less than a whole unit:
some examples that equal more than one unit:
and just a few that equal one unit:
During initial instruction, all examples should include circles divided into parts. After several 
weeks, other shapes (squares, rectangles, triangles) can be included in the exercises.
Special attention should be given to examples containing a series of units that are not divided:

Chapter 13 Fractions 295
These figures need additional explanation. The teacher should point out that if a whole is not 
divided into parts, students should write a 1 on the bottom. The 1 tells that there is only one 
part in the whole unit. The next step is to have the students count the number of whole units and 
write that as the numerator. Examples that yield 1 as a denominator should not be introduced 
when fractions are initially presented but can be introduced about a week after initial instruction. 
Thereafter, about 1 in every 10 figures should be an example with 1 as a denominator. These 
examples are important, since they present a conceptual basis for exercises in which students 
will convert a whole numeral to a fraction (8 = ¾).
Drawing Figures to Represent Fractions
Prior to constructing figures, students should practice completing fractions and shading in the 
correct fractional parts on a number line. Translating numerical fractions into figures is a useful 
exercise for reinforcing conceptual understanding of the part-whole fraction relationship. Constructing figures can be introduced when students can accurately fill in the numerals to represent 
a figure. The procedure is relatively simple, so we haven’t included a format. The teacher should 
begin instruction by modeling how to divide circles into equal-sized parts, emphasizing the need 
to divide the circles so that each part is the same size. Examples can be limited to fractions with 
2, 3, or 4 as denominators. These examples allow for adequate discrimination without spending 
an inordinate amount of time teaching younger students to divide circles into more than four 
parts. After several days of practice dividing whole units into parts, the teacher would present 
a worksheet exercise, prompting the students as they draw figures. The teacher has the students 
say what each number tells, beginning with the bottom number. For ¾, the teacher would say 
the following: “Touch the bottom number. What does it tell you? . . . Draw four parts in each 
whole. . . . Touch the top number . . . What does it tell you?. . . Shade in three parts.”
Figure 13.1 includes a sample worksheet. Note that each example has four circles. The 
purpose of keeping the number of circles constant is to prevent students from thinking that the 
number of whole units has something to do with the numerator and/or denominator.
Reading Fractions
When fractions are initially introduced, students are taught to decode the fraction by identifying what each numeral in the fraction represents. The fraction ¾ is read as “four parts in each 
whole; three parts are used.” This translation is recommended because it accurately describes
FIGURE 13.1 Sample worksheet for 
drawing diagrams from numerical fractions

296 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
the fraction. Several weeks after fractions are introduced, reading fractions in the traditional 
way can be taught; for example, ¾ is read as ‘‘three-fourths.” Format 13.4: Reading Fractions 
shows how to teach students to read fractions in the traditional way. The teacher writes several 
fractions on the board and models how to read the fractions, testing after each example. Then 
the teacher tests students on reading the fractions without first providing the model. To correct 
student errors, the teacher would model the correct response again, test the students, and then 
use the alternating pattern to provide practice on the missed example.
This format for reading fractions should be presented daily until students can accurately 
read fractions and then reviewed intermittently. Thereafter, students will receive practice in 
reading fractions at the same time new fraction skills are introduced. For example, in adding 
fractions, students will practice reading fractions when they are asked to read the problem 
aloud.
Two example-selection guidelines should be followed in teaching students to read fractions. 
First, the introduction of fractions with the numerals 2, 3, or 5 as denominators should be delayed 
several lessons because these denominators are not pronounced by adding the suffix “-ths” to 
the number as is the case for sixths, ninths, and fourths. When a 2 appears as the denominator, students will say “halves,” not “twoths”; when a 3 appears, students will say “thirds,” not 
“threeths”; when a 5 appears, students will say “fifths,” not “fiveths.” These denominators need 
to be introduced one at a time using a model-test procedure. Fractions with 2 as a denominator 
might be introduced first. When introducing 2 as a denominator, about half of the examples in 
the teaching set should contain 2 in the denominator, while the other half should represent a 
variety of previously introduced denominators:
1 1 3 3 5 5 1 4
24282762
When students have mastered denominators of 2, they are introduced in the same way to fractions with 5, then 3, as denominators.
A second example-selection guideline addresses the numerators. In about a fourth of the 
examples, the numeral 1 should be written as the numerator. These examples are included so 
that the students can see the difference between how a fraction is said when the numerator is 1 
and when the numerator is more than 1: one-eighth versus four-eighths.
Determining Whether a Fraction Equals, Exceeds, 
or Is Less Than One Whole
Determining whether a fraction equals, exceeds, or is less than one whole is an important skill 
and also serves as a prerequisite for later exercises in which students are expected to convert 
an improper fraction like 1⅝ to a mixed numeral: 2½. This skill can be introduced when students can accurately read fractions the traditional way. The teaching procedures appear in 
Format 13.5: Determining Whether a Fraction Equals, Exceeds, or Is Less Than One 
Whole. Part A is a pictorial demonstration in which the teacher draws pictures representing 
fractions of various values (more than 1, less than 1, equal to 1) and asks the students if the 
picture shows one whole, more than one whole, or less than one whole unit.
In Part B, the teacher presents rules to be used in determining whether a numerical fraction 
equals, exceeds, or is less than one whole unit. First, students are taught the rule that when the 
top and bottom number of a fraction are the same, the fraction equals one whole. After this rule 
is presented, the teacher tests the students’ application of the rule, using a series of numerical 
fractions, about half of which equal one whole:
564995728
544295378
Next, the teacher instructs students that when the top number of a fraction is more than the 
bottom number, the fraction equals more than one whole, and when the top number is less than 
the bottom number, the fraction equals less than one whole. Finally, the students are shown 
fractions and asked to tell whether the fraction is equal to, more than, or less than 1. A structured 

Chapter 13 Fractions 297
worksheet exercise follows in which students must circle either more, equal, or less when given 
numerical fractions:
3
4 more equal less 
8
8 more equal less
Note that in this format, the words “numerator” and “denominator” are not used. The purpose of excluding the terms is to avoid possible confusion between the terms. Similarly, use of 
the term improper fraction is not necessary for the students to understand the concept and, therefore, is not included in this format.
Examples for Parts B and C and independent practice should include a variety of problems. 
In about a third of the examples, the numerator and denominator of the fraction should be the 
same:
4 8 3
4 8 3
In another third, the numerator should be more than the denominator:
7 3 4
5 2 2
In another third, the numerator should be less than the denominator:
2 4 3
3 7 4
Reading and Writing Mixed Numerals
The above illustration may be expressed as the improper fraction ¾ or as the mixed fractional 
numeral 2¼. Reading and writing mixed numerals can be introduced relatively early in the fraction sequence, as soon as students can correctly determine when a fraction equals, exceeds, or 
is less than one whole. However, the teacher must keep in mind that exercises designed to teach 
students to convert mixed numbers to improper fractions and vice versa should not be introduced 
until much later in the fraction sequence because these conversions require students to know 
basic multiplication facts.
Part A of Format 13.6: Reading and Writing Mixed Numerals includes a pictorial 
demonstration that requires students to express the illustrations of improper fractions as mixed 
numeral by counting the number of whole units shaded and writing those numerals. Below is a 
sample exercise:
Part B is designed to teach students to read mixed numerals. The teacher uses a model-test 
procedure, having students first say the whole numeral, then the fraction, and then the mixed 
numeral. Note that the teacher emphasizes the word “and” when reading mixed numerals. The 
purpose of emphasizing “and” is to prevent errors in which the student either combines the 
whole numeral and the numerator, reading 4⅜ as “forty-two thirds,” or leaves out the numerator, 
reading 5⅓ as “five thirds.”
Part C is an exercise in which students are taught to write mixed numerals. The exercise 
begins with the teacher dictating a mixed number and having students first say the whole number 
and write the corresponding numeral. Then the students say the fraction part of the mixed number before writing the fraction. The teacher points out that when students write mixed numerals 
they are to make the whole numeral big and the numerals in the fraction small.

298 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: REWRITING FRACTIONS
The procedures in this section all involve the process of changing a fraction from one form to 
another without changing its value—that is, maintaining equivalency. Three main types of conversion skills are discussed:
1. Determining the missing number in a pair of equivalent fractions:
3 = □_
5 10
This type of problem is a critical component skill for problems involving adding and subtracting fractions with unlike denominators.
2. Reducing fractions to their lowest terms. A fraction is said to be at its lowest term (or simplest form) when both the numerator and denominator have no common factor except 1:
20 ι 5— can be reduced to —24 6
3. Converting mixed numerals to improper fractions:
and improper fractions to mixed numerals:
17 2
5 ~ ⅜
A general preskill for all rewriting skills is knowledge of basic multiplication and division 
facts. To perform all three types of conversion problems, students must be able to multiply and 
divide. Therefore, we recommend introducing rewriting fractions in fourth grade.
The strategies presented here are designed so that students not only learn the necessary 
computation required to change fractions into equivalent forms but also understand the underlying concepts of equivalency. Without understanding equivalency, students will be able to 
apply very few of the skills they learn. For example, if students do not understand that when the 
numerator and denominator are the same, the fraction is equal to 1, they will not understand why 
¾ can be multiplied by ⅝ to create the equivalent fraction 1⅝o. Although the equivalency concept 
is relatively sophisticated, the language of the strategies is simplified to make them accessible 
to all students.
Completing Equivalent Fractions
Instruction in equivalent fractions begins with problems in which the student must determine the 
missing numerator in an equivalent fraction:
3 = ∩ £ = □
4 12 2 10
The basic strategy is to multiply the first fraction by a fraction that equals one. In working the 
first problem above, the student determines that to end up with an equivalent fraction that has 12 
as a denominator, the fraction ¾ must be multiplied by
3 (3) 9- X — = —
4 (3) 12
Equivalency is maintained because, by definition, the identity element for multiplication is 1. 
When multiplying ¾ by ⅜, we are multiplying ¾ by a fraction that equals 1. Therefore, we are 
not changing the value of ¾.

Chapter 13 Fractions 299
Preskills Several skills should be mastered before equivalency problems are introduced: 
(a) knowledge of the terms numerator and denominator, (b) the ability to multiply fractions, and 
(c) the ability to construct a fraction that equals one whole.
The terms “numerator” and “denominator” are usually introduced in second or third grade. 
The teaching procedure is simple. The teacher tells students the numerator is the top number in 
the fraction and the denominator is the bottom number in the fraction. The teacher then provides 
practice by writing several fractions on the board and having students identify the denominator 
and numerator of each fraction using examples presented in a random order. Daily practice is 
necessary so students won’t forget or confuse the terms.
Multiplication of two fractions is usually taught in fourth grade. Procedures for teaching 
this skill are presented later in this chapter.
Constructing fractions equal to one whole is introduced about 2 weeks prior to introducing equivalent fraction problems. Format 13.7: Preskill: Constructing Fractions Equal to 1 
includes procedures for constructing fractions equal to 1. Part A is a structured board exercise 
in which a rule for constructing fractions equal to 1 is introduced: “When the top number is the 
same as the bottom number, the fraction equals 1.” In Part B: Structured Worksheet, the teacher 
presents examples of applying the rule with problems such as:
in which the student must fill in the missing numerator of a fraction equal to one whole.
Format 13.8A: Computing Equivalent
Fractions
Watch how Lori asks her students 
to apply the equivalent fractions 
rule.
Format The procedure for computing equivalent fractions is shown in Format 13.8: Computing Equivalent Fractions. Part A includes a pictorial demonstration introducing the concept 
of equivalent fractions. The teacher first defines the term “equivalent fractions,” explaining that 
fractions are equal when they show that equal amounts of the whole units are used. The teacher 
then draws two circles on two clear plastic sheets, each divided into a different number of parts 
but each with equal portions shaded:
The teacher points out that these fractions are equivalent, since the same amount of each whole 
unit is shaded. The same demonstration is presented with a figure in which unequal proportions 
of the whole units are shaded:
The teacher points out that the fractions are not equivalent, since the shaded amounts of the 
whole units do not take up the same space.
Part B introduces a critical rule: When you multiply by a fraction that equals 1, the answer 
equals the number you start with. The teacher introduces this rule and then presents a set of 
problems demonstrating how this rule is applied. In some of the problems, the original fraction 
is multiplied by a fraction that equals 1, and in some, the original fraction is multiplied by a fraction not equal to 1. The students are to tell whether the answer will equal the original fraction.
Part C is a structured board exercise in which the teacher presents the strategy for working 
equivalency problems such as:
3 = _□
4 20
The teacher explains that the equal sign tells that the fractions are equal. The student’s task is to 
find the missing numerator in the second fraction.
The teacher writes parentheses after the first fraction
□
20

300 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
explaining that the students must multiply the first fraction by a fraction that equals 1, which 
will be written inside the parentheses. The parentheses indicate multiplication. The teacher 
demonstrates how to figure out the denominator to be written inside the parentheses by using 
a missing-factor multiplication strategy. In the problem above, the teacher asks, “4 times what 
number equals 20?”
The answer, 5, is written as the denominator inside the parentheses:
3/ A
4 ∖5∕
□
20
The teacher then points out that since the fraction inside the parentheses must equal one whole, 
the numerator must be the same as the denominator. The missing number in the equivalent fraction can be determined by multiplying the numerator in the first fraction and the numerator in 
the second fraction:
3√5λ
4∖5√
15
20
Example Selection There are three example-selection guidelines for this format. First, the 
denominator of the first fraction must be a number that can be multiplied by a whole number to 
end with the denominator of the second fraction. Therefore, problems such as:
2 = □ 4 = □ 2 _ □
3 “ 5 5 ” 8 3 ^ 7
are not appropriate to include, while problems such as:
2 _ □ 4 _ □ 2 _ □
3 “ 6 5 “ 10 3 “ 9
are appropriate. Second, the fraction equal to one in the parentheses should vary from problem 
to problem. For example, in one problem, the numerator and denominator in the second fraction 
could be four times bigger than the original:
3 = □_
5 20
in the next problem, two times bigger:
5 = _□
6 12
in the next, five times bigger:
2 = □_ 
3 15
and so on. The third guideline is that all problems should require multiplication; that is, the 
numbers in the fraction to be completed should be greater than the numbers in the first fraction.
Reducing Fractions
We recommend that reducing fractions be introduced during fifth grade using a greatest- 
common-factor (GCF) strategy. In this strategy, students are taught to reduce a fraction to its 
simplest terms by identifying the greatest common factor of the numerator and denominator. 
For example, the fraction 9∕ιs is reduced by identifying 3 as the greatest common factor of 9 
and 15. When the factor 3 is pulled out, ¾5 becomes ⅜. The greatest-common-factor strategy 
is a viable strategy only for problems in which it is relatively easy to find the greatest common 
factor (1⅜7,30∕35, ¾6). Nearly all of the problems that require reducing that students encounter in 
fifth grade can be reduced to simplest terms using the greatest-common-factor strategy. Later, 
students will be taught to pull successive factors out of larger numbers.

Chapter 13 Fractions 301
Preskills Teaching students to find the greatest common factor of two numbers is the critical 
preskill for reducing fractions. The greatest common factor of two numbers is the largest number that can be multiplied by whole numbers to end with the two target numbers. For example, 
the greatest common factor of 12 and 18 is 6. Six can be multiplied by whole numbers to 
reach 12 and 18.
The first step in teaching students to find the greatest common factor of two numbers is to 
teach them to determine all possible factors for a given number. For example, the numbers 1, 
2, 3, 4, 6, and 12 are all factors of 12, since they can all be multiplied by another whole number 
to reach 12. Table 13.1 includes a list of the factors for the numbers 1 through 50. Once the 
students can easily determine all factors for a number, finding the greatest common factor is 
relatively easy.
Format 13.9: Preskill: Determining Factors outlines the procedures for teaching students 
to determine factors. In Part A, the teacher introduces the term “factor,” defining factors as any 
numbers that are multiplied together. In Part B, the teacher presents a strategy for figuring out 
all of the factors for a target number. The teacher writes the numeral for the target number on 
the board and beside it writes spaces for each factor. For example, if the target is 15, the teacher 
writes 15 on the board and puts four blanks beside it, since four numbers (1, 3, 5, 15) are factors of 15. The teacher then tells the students that they are going to find all of the numbers that 
are factors of 15 by asking if they can multiply a number by another number and end up with 
15. The teacher always begins with one: “A number multiplied by 1 always equals itself. Is 1 a 
factor of 15?” The teacher then points out that they can find another factor by determining what 
number times that factor equals the target number. For example, after determining that 15 is a 
factor of 15, the teacher asks, “What number times 1 equals 15?” The answer, 15, is the factor of 
15 that goes with 1. The teacher writes 1 in the first space and 15 in the last space.
The teacher then asks about other numbers, beginning with 2 and proceeding forward 
(3, 4, 5, 6, . . .): “Can we multiply 2 and end with 15? No, so 2 is not a factor of 15,” and so 
on. The teacher instructs the students to stop her when she says a number that is a factor of 
the target number. When the students identify another factor of the target number, the teacher
Number Factors* (other than the number itself and 1)t
TABLE 13.1 Factors for 1 to 50
4: 2, 2 28: 14, 2; 7, 4
6: 3, 2 30: 15, 2; 10, 3; 6, 5
8: 4, 2 32: 16, 2; 8,4
9: 3, 3 33: 11, 3
10: 5, 2 34: 17, 2
12:6, 2; 3,4 35: 7, 5
14: 7, 2 36: 18, 2; 9, 4; 6, 6
15: 5, 3 38: 19, 2
16: 4, 4; 8, 2 39: 13, 3
18: 6, 3; 9, 2 40: 20, 2; 10, 4; 8, 5
20: 10, 2; 5, 4 42: 21, 2; 14, 3; 7, 6
21:3, 7 44: 22, 2; 11,4
22: 11, 2 45: 15, 3; 9, 5
24: 12, 2; 8, 3; 6, 4 46: 23, 2
25: 5, 5 48: 24, 2; 12, 4; 8, 6
26: 13, 2 49: 7, 7
27: 9, 3 50: 25, 2; 10, 5
*Factors are listed in pairs.
+Numerals not in list have only the number itself and 1 as factors.

302 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
once again leads them in finding the corresponding factor to produce the target number. If 
15 is the target number, the students say stop after the teacher says 3. The teacher asks what 
number times 3 equals 15. The students answer 5. The teacher points out that 3 and 5 are both 
factors of 15. When target numbers over 20 are introduced, the teacher models the answer for 
the larger numbers. That is, the teacher tells the student any two-digit number that is a factor 
of the target number. For example, when introducing 28, the teacher says that 14 and 2 can be 
multiplied to equal 28.
Part C is a worksheet exercise. Numerals for target numbers are written on the worksheet. 
Students are to fill in the factors, beginning with the smallest factor. The objective of this format 
is to develop fluency in naming all possible factors of numbers. A systematic plan for introducing new target numbers and reviewing target numbers should be followed. One or two new 
target numbers can be introduced daily. (Table 13.2 contains a suggested sequence for introducing target numbers.) Part A of the format is used only with the first pair of target numbers. New 
target numbers are introduced using the board presentation in Part B. The worksheet exercise 
described in Part C could be done independently after the first several lessons. A target number 
should appear on practice worksheet exercises daily for several weeks after it is introduced to 
develop fluency.
Determining the Greatest Common Factor Format 13.10: Determining the Greatest 
Common Factor (GCF) is introduced when the students are able to determine the factors of any 
target number below 20. The format is relatively simple. The teacher defines the phrase “greatest 
common factor” as the largest number that is a factor of both target numbers. The teacher then 
leads the students through finding the greatest common factor. First, the teacher asks students 
what the largest factor of the smaller target number is and if that factor is also a factor of the 
other target number. The teacher continues until the greatest common factor is identified. For 
example, when 8 and 20 are the target numbers, the teacher asks the following questions:
“8 is the largest factor of 8. Is 8 a factor of 20?” (No.)
“What is the next largest factor of 8?” (4.)
“Is 4 a factor of 20? (Yes.)
“So, 4 is the greatest common factor of 8 and 20.”
TABLE 13.2 Sequence for Introducing Target Numbers and Their Factors
Day
Factors of These Numbers 
Are Introduced Day
Factors of These
Numbers Are Introduced
1 12, 7 16 27, 29
2 10, 3 17 28
3 16, 5 18 30, 31
4 8, 13 19 32, 33
5 4, 6, 9 20 34, 37
6 2, 17 21 35, 39
7 12, 19 22 36, 41
8 14, 23 23 38, 43
9 15 24 40, 47
10 18 25 42
11 20 26 44
12 21 27 45
13 22 28 46
14 24 29 48
15 25, 26 30 49
31 50

Chapter 13 Fractions 303
After about 5 days of presenting the format, the teacher gives students daily worksheet 
exercises to work independently. The worksheet includes 8 to 12 problems in which students 
find the greatest common factor of two target numbers. A typical error in independent exercises 
involves writing a common factor that is not the greatest common factor of the two target numbers; for example, writing 3 as the greatest common factor of 12 and 18. The correction involves 
pointing out to students that they can find a larger common factor.
Example-selection guidelines are quite important. In about half of the problems, the greatest common factor should be the smaller of the two target numbers (6, 18; 4, 8; 2, 10; 5, 20). 
If examples such as these are not included, students might develop the misrule that the smaller 
number is never the greatest common factor. Examples should be limited to numbers for which 
students have been taught to find factors. Initially, both target numbers should be under 20. As 
students learn to determine factors for larger numbers, the larger numbers can be included. Several examples should be included in which 1 is the greatest common factor, as in 4 and 7 or 6 
and 11. These prepare students for fractions that cannot be reduced (⅜, 6∕n).
Reducing Fractions Format 13.11: Reducing Fractions is introduced when students are 
able to determine the greatest common factor of any two target numbers below 20. The format 
includes three parts. Part A is a board exercise in which the teacher presents the strategy for 
reducing fractions. The teacher writes a fraction on the board with an equal sign next to it. Next 
to the equal sign are parentheses and a fraction bar for the reduced fraction:
The greatest common factor of the two target numbers (the numerator and denominator of 
the original fraction) determines the fraction equal to one inside the parentheses. For example, 
the greatest common factor of 12 and 16 is 4. Therefore, the fraction in the parentheses will be 
¾, which equals 1. The teacher then asks, “12 equals 4 times what number?” The answer is 3, 
which is the numerator of the reduced fraction. The teacher then asks, “16 equals 4 times what 
number?” The answer is 4, which is the denominator of the reduced fraction. Since multiplying 
by 1 does not change the value of the fraction, ¾ can be crossed out. Crossing out the fraction 
equal to 1 leaves the reduced fraction:
12 = ( 4 λ 3
16 “ ∖⅞) 4
Part B is a structured worksheet exercise in which the teacher first asks for the greatest common factor of the numerator and denominator of a fraction. The teacher then instructs the students to write the corresponding fraction equal to 1 in parentheses. Finally, the teacher instructs 
students how to solve for the missing factors in the reduced fraction. Part C is a less-structured 
worksheet exercise that provides additional practice.
The steps for reducing fractions are outlined in Summary Box 13.1.
There are three example-selection guidelines for exercises on reducing fractions. First, the 
numerators and denominators should be ones for which students have been taught to find factors. At first, both the numerator and denominator should be below 25. As students learn to find 
factors for larger numbers, fractions with these larger numbers can be included.
Second, a third of the fractions should have the greatest common factor as the numerator. 
For example, in the fractions 4∕12, ¾6, and ⅝o, the numerator is the greatest common factor. 
Finally, about a third of the fractions should already be expressed in their simplest terms (4∕7, 
⅜, 6∕11) to show students that not all fractions can be reduced. An example set following these 
guidelines appears below:
12 b. -8
4
8' 12
c.
h∙ 9
d. — 12
. 9
1. ---11
e.5
7
6
3
5

304 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
rSUMMARYj BOX 13.1
Reducing Fractions
2. lθ = ∩°
15 k ∕□
10 ∕5∖ □
’ 15 ∖5√□
4 =15 ∖5√[≡
≡∙FCIJI
Students read the fraction.
Students determine the greatest common factor for the numerator 
and denominator.
Students construct a fraction equal to one using the greatest 
common factor.
Students find the numerator for the fraction by solving
5 × □ = 10 and find the denominator by solving 5 × □ = 15. 
Students cross out the fraction equal to one and identify ∣- as the 
reduced fraction.
All items have numerators and denominators that are below 25. Items b, f, and g are fractions in 
which the smaller number is a factor of the larger number. Items c, e, and i are fractions that are 
already expressed in their simplest terms.
Reducing Fractions with Larger Numbers After several weeks of practice reducing fractions using the greatest common factor strategy, students can be introduced to the concept of pulling 
out successive common factors. When the greatest common factor is difficult to find, students can 
reduce the fraction to its simplest terms by repeatedly pulling out factors. Note the examples below:
45 _ ∕5λ 9 _ /3λ 3 _ 3
a' 75 ∖5√ 15 ∖3√ 5 ~ 5
24 ∕2λ 12 ∕6∖2 (2∖ I 1
72 ∖2∕36 ∖6 J 6 ∖2 J 3 3
The teacher guides students through sets of problems, pointing out clues students can use 
to determine if a fraction is reduced to its simplest term. For example, if both the numerator and 
the denominator are even numbers, the fraction can still be reduced. Or, if the numerator and 
denominator both end in either 5 or zero, the fraction can still be reduced.
The teacher then presents an exercise in which students check answers to determine if the 
answers are reduced to their simplest terms. During that exercise, the teacher gives students a 
worksheet with problems similar to those below, some of which have not been reduced to their 
simplest terms. The students are asked to find those fractions that can be further reduced and to 
reduce those fractions.
64 ∣ A}. 16 d. 65 ∖ 13a. --- ,"' ' 1 ---- 1 ---  " 11 -------- ----- 1 ---- 1 -------- zzz
72 W 18 85 v>' 15
b. 45 i 9 48 1 24--- -- 1 ---- ι ---  — e. -------- —- I ---- 1 ---  -75 ∖3)' 15 64
kz√
' 32
21 (Al 7 f. 56 (2∖ 28c. 1 ---- 1 ---  — -------- — 1 ---- 1 -------- ^~~~
30 ∖z), 10 84 ∖2J 42
Converting Mixed Numerals and Improper Fractions
An improper fraction, one whose numerator is greater than its denominator, is a fraction that 
equals more than one whole. An improper fraction may be converted to a mixed numeral by 
dividing its numerator by its denominator. For example, to convert the fraction 1⅜ to a mixed 
numeral, we divide 13 by 5, which equals 2 with a remainder of 3. The remainder is written as 
the fraction 3/s; the improper fraction 1⅜ is converted to the mixed numeral 2⅜.

Chapter 13 Fractions 305
Converting a mixed numeral to an improper fraction requires the reverse operation, multiplication rather than division. Students first change the whole number into a fraction by multiplying the whole number by the number of parts in each whole, indicated by the denominator. 
For example, in the mixed numeral 6¼, students convert the whole number 6 into a fraction by 
multiplying 6 by the denominator of ¼∖
. 24for 6 = -, students write —4 4
After students convert the whole number to a fraction, they add the numerators of the fractions:
1 24+1 256— — --------- — —4 4 4
On the Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart, we recommend that converting 
improper fractions to mixed numerals be introduced in early fourth grade. Students apply this 
skill when they rewrite their answers after adding or multiplying fractions. Converting a mixed 
numeral to an improper fraction should not be introduced until several months later. We recommend separating the introduction of these conversion skills to decrease the probability of students 
confusing the two operations. Converting mixed numerals to and from improper fractions requires 
that students have a good understanding of the difference between a whole unit and parts of a unit. 
Therefore, students should have mastered all of the fraction analysis skills presented earlier.
Format 13.12AB:
Converting Improper 
Fractions to Mixed 
Numbers
Watch how Lori uses voice 
emphasis to help students discriminate between whole and 
fractional numbers.
Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numerals Part A of Format 13.12: Converting Improper Fractions to Mixed Numerals is a pictorial demonstration in which the teacher 
shows how to construct a figure to determine how many whole units an improper fraction equals.
Part B is a structured board presentation in which the teacher presents the strategy of dividing the numerator by the denominator. Note the special emphasis given to explaining how to 
write the remainder as a fraction. The teacher explains that the denominator of the new fraction 
in the mixed number must be the same denominator as in the original fraction.
Part C is a structured worksheet exercise. The division symbol, along with boxes for the 
whole number and the fraction remainder, are written as prompts on the students’ worksheets:
11 _
4 “ J
The teacher begins the exercise by instructing the students to look at the fraction and determine whether it is less than one whole, equal to one whole, or more than one whole. If the fraction is less than 1 or equal to 1, students are instructed to leave the fraction as it is. If the fraction
equals more than 1, they are instructed to divide and write the answer as a mixed numeral.
Part D is a less structured worksheet exercise in which students convert improper fractions 
to mixed numbers with minimal teacher prompting. Teachers should insist that students write 
the whole numeral part of the answer and the fraction part of the answer neatly. Teachers should 
watch for students writing answers in which the numerator of the fraction could easily be mis2 32taken for a whole numeral. In the following example, 3~ is written as —:
Examples should be selected to provide appropriate discrimination practice. First, there 
should be a mixture of problems. About half of the fractions should translate to a mixed number; 
about a fourth should translate simply to a whole number (⅝, 1¾ 10∕5)∙, finally, about a fourth 
should be proper fractions. Including proper fractions ensures that students do not attempt to
inappropriately convert all fractions to mixed number ( — = 1¼
∖4

306 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
After students have had several weeks of practice converting improper fractions to mixed 
numbers and reducing fractions to their lowest terms, they can be given exercises in which they 
must first convert the fractions to mixed numbers and then reduce the fractions. No special format is required for such exercises. The teacher gives students a worksheet with directions similar to these: “Change any fraction that equals one or more whole units to a mixed number. Then 
reduce the fractions.” A set of examples would include a mix of proper and improper fractions, 
some of which can be reduced and some of which are written in their simplest form. A sample 
set might include these fractions:
16 6 9 14 5
12 8 7 6 7
8 20 9 24
24 8 12 10
Exercises of this type should be continued for several months to develop fluency.
Converting Mixed Numbers to Improper Fractions Format 13.13: Converting Mixed 
Numbers to Improper Fractions includes four parts. Parts A and B teach the component skill 
of translating any whole number into an improper fraction by multiplying the number of whole 
units by the number of parts in each whole:
In 6 = —, students multiply 6 × 4
Because this component skill is very important, both a board and a worksheet exercise are 
presented.
Part C, a structured board presentation, teaches the strategy to convert a mixed number into 
an improper fraction. First, the students determine the fraction equivalent to the whole number; 
then they add the fraction portion of the mixed number. For example, with 6¾, students multiply 
6 × 4 and then add 3 to determine the answer:
3 24 + 3 276 - —--------- — —4 4 4
Part D is a structured worksheet exercise that provides additional practice.
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: ADDITION
AND SUBTRACTION OF FRACTIONS
• ∙ ∙.......
Addition and subtraction of fractions include three basic types of problems. The first type has 
like denominators:
3 £ 2 _ □ 7 _ 3 _ □
8 + 8 + 8 ^ □ 9 9 ” □
Problems of this type can be introduced during the primary grades, since relatively few preskills 
are required to work the problems. The students learn that to work such problems, they work 
only across the numerators; the denominators remain constant:
2 £ _ 3 7 _ 3 = 4
5 + 5 “ 5 9 9 ~ 9
The second type includes problems with unlike denominators. Problems in this group 
are limited initially to those in which the lowest common denominator (LCD) is relatively 
easy to figure out. Problems of this type are usually introduced during fifth grade. The strategy for solving these problems involves first figuring out the lowest common denominator,

Chapter 13 Fractions 307
rewriting each fraction as an equivalent fraction with that denominator, and then working
the problem:
5 5∕2λ 10— becomes — — = —6 6∖2∕ 12
3 3∕3λ 9— becomes — — 1 = —4 4∖3√ 12
10 _ 9 _ 1
12 12 ^^ 12
The third type includes problems in which the lowest common denominator is difficult to 
determine because relatively large numbers are involved. We recommend using the equivalent 
fractions strategy for solving these types of problems. Initially, we recommend finding a common denominator of two large numbers by multiplying the denominators. For example, in the 
problem ¾3 + 3∕∣s, the common denominator is 234. This is determined by multiplying 13 by 18. 
Given these two factors, students can generate the fractions equal to one that produce fractions 
with like denominators and solve the problem.
V A
13 VI8 J
5 /18 A 
13∖18∕
234
90
234
V A 
18∖13∕ 
3 /13 λ 
18∖13∕
234
39
234
90 39 _ 129
234 + 234 “ 234
Finally, the student would need to reduce the answer to the addition problem using Format 
13.11: Reducing Fractions. Another strategy typically used with older students for reducing fractions with large numbers involves prime factorization to determine the least common 
denominator. Prime factorization is discussed in more detail in Chapter 18.
Fractions with Like Denominators
Adding and subtracting fractions with like denominators is a relatively simple operation that can 
be introduced after fraction analysis skills have been taught in third grade. Part A of Format 
13.14: Adding and Subtracting Fractions with Like Denominators includes a pictorial 
demonstration in which the teacher illustrates adding fractions. In Part B, the teacher presents 
the rule that students can add and subtract only fractions in which each whole has the same 
number of parts.
Parts C and D are structured and less structured worksheet exercises in which the students 
are presented with a set of addition and subtraction problems. Half of the problems should have 
like denominators:
and half different denominators:
Students are instructed to identify and cross out the problems with unlike denominators and 
work the problems with like denominators. The problems with unlike denominators are included 
to encourage students to pay attention to the denominators when working problems.
During the first week or two of instruction, adding and subtracting fraction problems should 
be written horizontally. When students can work problems written horizontally, vertically 
aligned problems should be introduced:
3 4 5
4 8 7
1 3 2-- ---- _|--4 8 3
3 __ £ 5 2
4 3 7 + 3

308 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
The teacher introduces vertically aligned problems using Parts C and D of Format 13.14. 
Teachers should not assume that because students can work horizontally aligned problems, they 
will be able to work vertically aligned problems.
Problems with Mixed Numbers
Adding and subtracting mixed numbers in which the fractions have like denominators:
2 13--1-5 5
can be introduced when students can read and write mixed numerals and can add and subtract 
fractions with like denominators. The teaching procedure is relatively simple: The students first 
work the fraction part of the problem and then the whole number part of the problem. Both horizontally and vertically aligned problems should be presented.
Fractions with Unlike Denominators
Adding and subtracting fractions with unlike denominators is usually introduced during late 
fourth grade. A strategy for solving problems with unlike denominators is outlined in Summary 
Box 13.2. Note the integration of several component skills.
Preskills Two preskills should be mastered before the format for adding and subtracting 
fractions with unlike denominators is introduced: (a) finding the least common multiple of two 
numbers and (b) rewriting a fraction as an equivalent fraction with a given denominator (see 
Format 13.8: Computing Equivalent Fractions).
The least common multiple (LCM) of two numbers is the smallest number that has both 
numbers as factors. For example, the least common multiple of the numbers 6 and 8 is 24, since 
24 is the smallest number that has both 6 and 8 as factors. Likewise, the least common multiple 
of 6 and 9 is 18, since 18 is the smallest number that has 6 and 9 as factors.
Format 13.15: Preskill: Finding the Least Common Multiple shows how to teach students to figure out the least common multiple of two numbers. This format assumes that students 
are able to skip count by twos through nines. About 2 months prior to introducing the least 
common multiple, the teacher should begin reviewing the skip-counting series. Students who 
know their basic multiplication facts but have not learned skip counting should have little trouble learning to skip count. (See Chapter 4 for teaching skip counting.)
The strategy for finding the least common multiple requires students to say the skip-counting 
series for two numbers and to select the smallest number appearing in both series. This strategy
'SUMMARY j BOX 13.2
Steps for Problems with Unlike Denominators
3 χ1. 4 + 6
2. 3 1^— +4 6
9
12 12
9 2
12 12
Students read problem and say, "The problem can't be worked as it is 
because the denominators are not the same."
Students determine that the least common multiple of 4 and 6 is 12. 
Thus 12 is the least common denominator. Both fractions must be 
rewritten with denominator of 12.
Students determine the fraction equal to one by which each original 
fraction must be multiplied to equal 12.
Students rewrite each fraction so that it has a denominator of 12.
Students work the problem with equivalent fraction. 

Chapter 13 Fractions 309
is viable for examples in which the numbers are small. A more sophisticated strategy must be 
taught to figure the least common multiple of larger numbers.
The format for teaching least common multiple includes two parts. In Part A, the teacher 
writes count-by series for two numbers on the board so that students can visually find the least 
common multiple. At that time, the teacher also introduces the term “multiple.” Part B is a 
worksheet presentation in which the teacher leads students in finding the least common multiple 
for several pairs of numbers and then monitors as students complete a worksheet on their own. 
Daily practice on worksheet exercises involving finding the least common multiple of two numbers is continued until students demonstrate mastery.
There are two example-selection guidelines for the least-common-multiple format. First, in 
about half of the problems, the larger number should be a multiple of the smaller number. For 
the numbers 3 and 12, 12 is a multiple of 3. The least common multiple of 12 and 3 is 12. The 
second guideline pertains to the other half of the problems in which the larger number is not a 
multiple of the lower number. In these problems, both numbers should be below 10.
Format 13.16A: 
Adding and 
Subtraction Fractions with 
Unlike Denominators 
Watch how Lori uses the preskill 
from Format 13.15 to correct 
the error a student makes in finding the least common multiple.
Format Format 13.16: Adding and Subtracting Fractions with Unlike Denominators has 
three parts. Part A is a structured board presentation, which begins with the teacher writing a 
problem on the board and asking the students if the fractions can be added (or subtracted) as they 
are written. After the students determine the fractions cannot be added (or subtracted) because 
the denominators are not the same, the teacher tells the students that they can work the problem 
by rewriting the fractions so that both have the same denominator. The teacher then demonstrates 
the problem-solving strategy outlined earlier: writing the least common multiple of both denominators; multiplying each fraction by a fraction equal to 1 (which enables them to be rewritten 
with their lowest common denominator) and then adding (or subtracting) the rewritten fraction.
In Parts B and C, the structured and less structured worksheet exercises, the teacher leads 
students through working problems. Note that Format 13.16 includes problems in which both 
fractions are rewritten. In many problems, only one fraction will need to be rewritten (in ¾ + ⅛, 
only ¾ needs to be rewritten as ⅝). When initially presenting this type of problem, the teacher 
has the students write the fraction — next to the fraction that does not need to be rewritten:
3
4
8
After several weeks, the teacher can explain that if the denominator of the rewritten fraction does 
not need to be changed, multiplying by — is not needed.
There are three example-selection guidelines for this format. The first addresses the manner 
in which problems are written. During the first 2 weeks, all problems should be written horizontally. When students can work horizontal problems, they can be introduced to vertically aligned 
problems.
The second guideline pertains to the variety of problems. Half of the problems should have 
denominators in which the larger denominator is a multiple of the smaller denominator. For 
example, in the problem
3 2
5 10
the larger denominator, 10, is a multiple of the smaller denominator, 5. In the other half of the 
problems, the denominators should be one-digit numerals that require finding a new common 
denominator:
3 2 3 2 5 1— _|_ — — ψ — — _ —
5 3 4 5 6 4
Several problems involving adding and subtracting fractions with like denominators also 
should be included. A sample set of problems appears below. Note that problems c and f have 

310 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
like denominators. Problems b, e, and g have a lower denominator that is a factor of the larger 
denominator. In problems a, d, and h, both fractions must be rewritten.
3 2a. —1—4 5
7 2 5 1b.-------- c-------9 3 6 6
d‰4
6 9
13 4 3
β 5 10 t9 + 9
7 1
8' 10 2 4 3
Reducing and Rewriting Answers as Mixed Numerals
The skills of reducing fractions to their lowest common terms and converting an improper fraction to a mixed numeral can be integrated into problems after students have had several weeks 
of practice working problems with unlike denominators. Students should be given problems that 
require them to convert the answer to a mixed number (when necessary) and/or reduce. Teachers 
should lead students through determining the correct answers for several days. Daily practice 
with six to eight problems should continue for several weeks.
More Complex Problems with Mixed Numbers
A rather difficult problem type involving mixed numbers is illustrated below:
8
2—3—4
This is a subtraction problem involving renaming. The student must rewrite the 8 as 7 and ¾ to 
work the problem. Prior to introducing such a problem, the teacher would present an exercise 
like the one below in which the student must rewrite a whole number as a whole numeral and a 
fraction equivalent to 1 (6 = 5 + ¾).
6 = Ξ + v 9 = EJ+^ 
4 6
In leading students through this preskill exercise, the teacher points out that they have to 
take one whole away from the original whole number and rewrite that one whole as a fraction. 
Once this preskill is taught, students should have little difficulty with problems that involve 
renaming.
Comparing Fractions
Students are often asked to compare the values of fractions. For example, which has the greater 
value, ⅓ or ⅓7 Which has the lesser value, ⅜ or ⅝7 During second and third grade, students 
usually are asked to compare fractions with numerators of 1 but with different denominators. 
The teacher can prepare students for these comparison questions by providing pictorial demonstrations illustrating that the more parts a unit is divided into, the smaller the size of each part.
The rule is: The bigger the denominator, the smaller the value of each part. For example, — is
smaller than —. The demonstrations can be followed by a rule-application exercise in which the 
teacher presents pairs of fractions with numerators of 1 and asks which fraction has a greater 
value.
In later grades, students are asked to compare fractions that have numerators other than 1 
(¾ and ⅝). The strategy for comparing the two fractions involves rewriting fractions so that they 
have common denominators (¾ would be rewritten as 2⅞6 and ⅝ as 2%6).

Chapter 13 Fractions 311
Once fractions have been rewritten so they have common denominators, their values are 
readily apparent. Procedures for teaching students to rewrite fractions with common denominators are the same as those discussed in the early steps of the format to add and subtract fractions 
with different denominators: determining the least common multiple of the denominators and 
multiplying each fraction by a fraction equal to 1.
Word Problems
The basic guideline for introducing fraction word problems is that a new type of fraction problem should be integrated into word problem exercises as soon as the students can accurately 
compute problems of that type. For example, word problems involving adding and subtracting 
fractions with like denominators should be introduced after students can compute these types of 
problems independently. Word problems with unlike denominators should be introduced only 
after students have mastered the strategy for adding and subtracting those types of fractions. All 
of the various types of addition and subtraction problems described in the problem-solving chapter (Chapter 11) should be included in the exercises. Figure 13.2 is a sample of problems that 
could be included on a worksheet given to students shortly after they learn how to add/subtract 
mixed numbers with fractions that have like denominators. Note the variety of word problem 
types (classification, action, and comparison).
FIGURE 13.2 Sample word problem worksheet 
with mixed numbers and like denominators
1. Tina ran 3⅜ miles in the morning and 21∕5 miles 
in the afternoon. How many miles did she run 
altogether?
2. We had ¾ of an inch of rain on Monday and ¼ 
of an inch of rain on Tuesday. How much more 
rain did we have on Monday?
3. Ricardo’s cat weighed 14⅜ pounds. If the cat 
gains 3⅛ pounds how much will it weigh?
4. Joan bought 6¾ pounds of meat. After she 
cooked the meat, it weighed 2¼ pounds. How 
much less does it weigh now?
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: MULTIPLICATION 
AND DIVISION OF FRACTIONS
• •••••« ∙
Multiplying Fractions
The first type of multiplication problem, which involves multiplying two proper fractions, is 
usually introduced in fourth grade:
3 2 4 1- × 4 5 9 3
The second type, which also is usually introduced during fourth grade, involves multiplying 
a fraction and a whole numeral. This type of problem is important, since it occurs often in word 
problems:
3- × 84
The third type of problem, usually introduced in fifth grade, involves multiplying one or 
more mixed number:
25 × 3—4
31 3 14- × 2— - × 2-52 4 2

312 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Multiplying Proper Fractions
Multiplying proper fractions can be introduced several weeks after students have learned to add 
and subtract fractions with like denominators. The steps for multiplying fractions are presented 
in Format 13.17: Multiplying Two Proper Fractions. The reason multiplying proper fractions 
is taught first is that it is a prerequisite for finding equivalent fractions and for the second type of 
multiplication problem, a fraction multiplied by a whole number.
The format includes two parts. In Part A, the structured board presentation, the teacher presents a rule about multiplying fractions—Work top times the top and bottom times the bottom—and 
demonstrates how to apply the rule to several problems. Part B is a structured worksheet presentation. Note that the examples in this part include both multiplication problems and problems that 
involve addition and subtraction of fractions. This mixture is essential to provide students with 
practice in discriminating between the multiplication strategy (multiply across the top and bottom) 
and the addition/subtraction strategy (work only across the top). Part B begins with a verbal exercise in which the teacher asks students how they work a particular type of problem (“What do you 
do when you multiply fractions? What do you do when you add or subtract fractions?”).
Multiplying Fractions and Whole Numbers
Problems that involve multiplying a fraction and a whole number are important because they 
have many real-life applications. For example, consider the following problem: “A boat engine 
2called for — of a quart of oil for every gallon of gasoline. John had 9 gallons of gas. How much
oil did he need?”
Multiplying fractions and whole numbers in word problems can be introduced when students have mastered multiplying proper fractions and converting an improper fraction to a 
mixed number. The steps in the problem-solving strategy are outlined in Summary Box 13.3.
Using pictorial demonstrations that represent multiplying a whole number by a fraction 
should precede the introduction of the format to promote conceptual understanding. For exam2pie, for the problem — × 6 the teacher would show six circles divided into thirds. In each of the
circles, two of the thirds would be shaded.
SUMMARY BOX 13.3
Multiplying Fractions and Whole Numbers
1. Student reads the problem. 4×≡
2. Student changes the whole numeral into a fraction. 3 8- X -4 1
3. Student multiplies numerators and denominators. 3 8 24
4 X 1 4
4. Student converts product into a whole numeral or mixed numeral. 3 8 24
4 X 1 “ 4

Chapter 13 Fractions 313
2The teacher would point out that the picture shows — six times. Then the teacher would have the
students count the shaded parts in all of the circles (12 shaded parts). The teacher would then 
12write the fraction — to represent all of the shaded parts and three parts in each whole. This fracFormat 13.18: Multiplying a Fraction and 
a Whole Number
Watch how Lori uses pictures to 
show her students that a whole 
number can be converted to a 
fraction.
2 tion would be reduced to show that — × 6 equals 4 wholes.
Format 13.18: Multiplying a Fraction and a Whole Number teaches students to multiply 
a fraction and a whole number. Part A introduces an essential component skill: converting a 
whole number to a fraction. Any whole number may be converted to a fraction by putting it over 
a denominator of 1. Part B is a structured board presentation during which the teacher models 
the strategy: converting a whole number to a fraction, multiplying fractions, and determining 
how many wholes the product of the fractions equals. Part C is a structured worksheet presentation. Note that the worksheet is set up with the prompt taught in Part B. After the fraction bar is 
a division sign and a box for the answer:
3
4 = □
Examples should be carefully designed. Some problems should have answers that are whole 
numbers: 
3- × 8 = 64
and some should have answers that are mixed numbers:
2 2- × 7 = 4-3 3
Initially, the whole number should represent a relatively small number (below 20). As students learn to multiply and divide larger numbers, the examples should include hundreds and 
then thousands numbers:
3- X 2000 4
Multiplying Mixed Numbers
Multiplying a mixed number and a whole number is an important component skill for advanced 
map-reading skills. For example, if 1 inch equals 50 miles, how many miles will 3½ inches equal?
50 X 3— = 1752
Initially, we recommend teaching a strategy in which the students convert a mixed number 
into an improper fraction before working the problem. See Summary Box 13.4 in which problems a and b illustrate the recommended steps.
Later, a more sophisticated strategy involving the distributive property may be introduced for 
problems in which a whole number and mixed number are multiplied. The students first multiply 
the whole-number factor by the whole number from the mixed-number factor, then multiply the 
whole-number factor by the fraction, and finally add the products. This process is shown below:
£
2
£ 
2
= 15 + 2*
2
1
= 17i

314 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
BOX 13.4
Multiplying Mixed Numbers
Steps Problems
a. × 3⅞ = b. 5 × 2^ =
2 4 4
1. Convert mixed number to improper fraction. 11 14 5 11
2 X 4 - 1 X T 2. Multiply. 11 14 = 154 511 _ 55
2 X 4 - 8 1 X 4 - 4
19^ = 19" 13∣ = 13"
8 4 4 4
3. Convert answer to mixed numeral. 154 τ----- 55 τ—s = 8) 154 — = 4j5Γo z+
Dividing Fractions
To introduce students to division of fractions, we recommend highlighting the relationship 
between fractions and multiplication/division number families. The number family relationships 
clearly illustrate the relationship between whole numbers and fractions. Students should be presented this concept as an introduction to dividing fractions no later than fifth grade. Teachers 
should introduce the fraction bar as another way of saying “divided by.” The fraction — also can 
be read as “1 divided by 2.” After students have practiced reading fractions both ways, they learn 
that multiplication number families can be turned.
20 becomes j, 
5 20
*
Students practice identifying the big number and the two small numbers. Later, students apply 
this knowledge to number lines.
Λ2
3
0
Students then complete the fractions for the number lines. The fraction for 1 on the number 
3 6line is The fraction for two is —. Next to the numerals on the number line, students complete
the number families that are turned. The numeral that goes in the box is the whole number on 
the number line. The numerals for the fractions are the vertically oriented numbers in the family. After students master reading fractions as division problems, teachers can introduce writing 
fractions as division problems. The teacher would have the students read the fraction, read the 
fraction as a division problem, write the regular division problem, and solve.

Chapter 13 Fractions 315
Dividing fractions is usually introduced in fifth grade. Fraction division problems may be 
divided into three types. First are those in which a proper fraction is divided by a proper fraction:
2 3 4^2
3'4 5'7
This type of problem, while used infrequently, is introduced first because it prepares students for 
the second type of problem in which a fraction is divided by a whole number:
Problems such as the one above are more common. For example, John has — of a pound of 
candy. He wants to split the candy up equally among his two friends. How much candy should 
he give to each friend?
The third type of problem involves dividing a mixed number:
3- ÷ 4 2 32
The strategy taught to solve division problems involves inverting the second fraction, 
3 2 .changing the sign to a multipheation sign, and then multiplying. For example, —÷— is worked 
2 3 3 9 4 . 3.
by inverting — so that the problem becomes — × — = —. Because the procedure is simple, we 
have not included a separate format. The teacher explains that division of fractions can be difficult. In order to make division of fractions easier, we “invert and multiply.” We recommend that 
the teacher demonstrate this procedure using several examples on the board before providing 
structured worksheets.
Although the strategy for dividing fractions is relatively simple, the rationale for using this 
strategy is more complex. Figure 13.3 provides a rationale for teachers who wish to demonstrate why this procedure is appropriate.
Problems in which students divide by a whole number are solved by first converting the 
whole number to a fraction and then inverting that fraction:
3 3 2 3 1 3-÷2=-÷-=-×-=-4 4 1 4 2 8
Problems that include a mixed number are solved by converting the mixed number to an 
improper fraction, inverting, and multiplying.
Word Problems—Multiplication and Division
Multiplication and division word problems can be introduced after students have mastered 
multiplying and dividing fractions. Multiplication word problems with fractions usually 
involve figuring out what a fractional part of a specified group equals. Here is a typical 
problem:
3There are 20 children in our class; — of the children are girls. How many girls are in the 
class? 4
This type of problem is introduced shortly after students can solve problems in which a fraction
and a whole number are multiplied— × 20 ). As an intermediate step to prepare students for
the word problems, the teacher can present problems with prompts like these:
∣=f9 = 5-□-of 12 =4

316 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
FIGURE 13.3 Rationale for fraction division strategy
To divide a fraction by another fraction, students are taught to invert the second fraction and multiply, which 
is essentially a shortcut. The strategy is based on two principles: the multiplicative identity element (any number 
multiplied [or divided] by 1 equals that number) and the inverse principle (any number multiplied by its inverse 
equals 1).
2 4 2 5
3 ’ 5 “ 3 X 4
To explain the invert and multiply strategy, we first rewrite the division problem with a fraction bar as a fraction 
2 
over a fraction. Remember, the fraction bar can be translated as "divide by." We still read the problem as - divided 
/1 3
2
3
4
5
Next we convert the denominator to 1. We want a 1 in the denominator because of the identity principle—a 
number divided by 1 equals that number. (Dividing by 1 is easier than dividing by any other number.) To convert the
4
5denominator to 1, we must multiply it by its inverse . Any number multiplied by its inverse equals 1. In this
example, × = = 1. In the original problem, this step looks like the following:
2/
2
4 5
5 ∖4
20 1
20
5 5 5If we multiply the denominator by -, we also must multiply the numerator by - because of the identify principle—- 
over is the same as multiplying by 1. Multiplying by a fraction of one is the procedure introduced earlier to generate equivalent fractions.
2
2
4
5
∕5∖ 
4
5
∖4∕
When we multiply the numerator, we get our answer to the division problem.
2∕5λ 10
3 ∖4∕ _ 12 _ 10
1 1 ~ 12
Inverting and multiplying is an easy and efficient way to divide fractions. 
2^4-2 5 _ 10
3 ’ 5 ~ 3 X 4 - 12
Students are taught that “of ’ in this problem can be translated to “multiply.” The problem ¾ of 
12 would be converted to ¾ × 12 and then solved:
3 12 36- × — = — = 94 1 4
As students are able to solve operations with larger numbers, the examples in the word 
2 2problems should include larger numbers. Instead of — of 12, a problem might ask for — of 126.

Chapter 13 Fractions 317
The most common type of division word problem involves dividing a fraction by a whole 
number. Here is an example of this type of problem:
2Mia has — of an apple left. She wants to share it equally with her 2 friends. How much of the
apple should she give to each friend?
This type of problem can be introduced when students can work problems in which a fraction 
can be divided by a whole number.
DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION OF COMMON 
FRACTION ERRORS
Students may miss fraction problems for one or a combination of the following reasons:
1. Fact error (dividing 18 by 3 and ending with 5, multiplying 7 × 8 and ending with 54): If 
a student misses a problem solely because of a fact error, the teacher need not spend time 
working on the fraction skill but should reteach the facts.
2. Component-skill error: The student makes an error on a previously taught skill, which causes 
the student to miss the current type of problem. For example, when working the problem 
2 1 12 2 1 2— × 12 the student converts 12 to the fraction — instead of — writing — × — = —.3 12 1 3 12 36
The remediation procedure involves reteaching the earlier-taught component skill. In the 
example given, the teacher first would reteach the student how to convert a whole number 
to a fraction. When the student’s performance indicates mastery of the component skill, the 
teacher would lead the student through solving the original type of problem using the structured worksheet part of the appropriate format.
3. Strategy error: A strategy error occurs when the student does not correctly follow the steps 
12to solve a problem. For example, when attempting to convert — to a whole number, the student subtracts 4 from 12, ending with 8. The remediation procedure involves reteaching the 
entire strategy beginning with the structured board part of the format.
The following sections give examples of common errors made on the various types of fraction problems along with suggestions for remediation.
Errors in Reading and Writing Fractions and Mixed Numerals
Students should read the problem as the first step in any format. If the teacher notices the student 
reading a fraction or mixed numeral incorrectly, the teacher would reintroduce the appropriate 
3format. For example, if a student misread — as “two-thirds,” then the teacher would present 
2 1 5
Format 13.4: Reading Fractions. Or if a student read 5 — as —, the teacher would present
Format 13.6: Reading and Writing Mixed Numerals.
Errors in Adding and Subtracting Fractions
When adding fractions with like denominators, students usually will make strategy errors or fact 
errors. Note the problems below:
7 2 5 4 2 6a.-------- = — b. —I----- =9 9 0 8 8 16
7 2 6 4 6 11C.----------— _ J 1------ =  
9 9 9 8 8 8
Problems a and b illustrate strategy errors. The student does not know that the denominators are 
not added or subtracted. The remediation procedure involves reintroducing Format 13.14: Adding 
and Subtracting Fractions with Like Denominators beginning with Part A. Problems c and d,

318 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
FIGURE 13.4 Errors in addition with unlike denominators
Error Patterns
4 2 4/ A 2 / λ 61 . — + — — — ∣ -----  I + — I -----  ) = ----5 3 5 ∖ × 3/ 3 ∖ × 3/ 15
15 15
16 16
4 2 4√×4λ 2 ∕× 8λ 322 . — -∣- — — —I -----j -j- — ∣ ------ ∣ — —
8 4 8∖X4∕ 4A-×-8-√ 32
32 32
Diagnosis
Component-skill error: 
student failed to multiply 
by a fraction equal to 
one in order to generate 
equivalent fractions with 
like denominators.
Component-skill error: 
student did not find 
least common multiple. 
Note that the answer is 
correct.
Strategy error: student 
adds denominators.
Remediation
Procedures
Present Format 13.16 
beginning with Part A, 
emphasizing step 5.
Remediation
Examples
Addition problems 
with unlike denominators
10 5
λ 5 2 ÷÷÷÷ 154 + —— +  ------ = —
∕62 ⅛ 12
7<z 7o4 ∖ ∕o2 y ∖12 J
Fact error: student multiplied 2 × 3 incorrectly.
Teacher points this 
out but emphasizes 
it's important to find 
the least common 
multiple. Present 
Format 13.15.
Present entire format 
for fractions with 
unlike denominators 
(13.16) over, beginning with Part A.
Teacher works on 
2 × 3 fact.
Find the LCM of 6 
and 9, 8 and 6, 4 
and 12, etc. Include 
examples when 
one of the denominators is the LCM.
Addition problems 
with unlike denominators
on the other hand, indicate fact errors. The remediation procedure depends on the number of problems missed. If a student misses less than 10% of the problems because of fact errors, the teacher 
works on the facts missed. If the student misses more than 10% of the problems because of fact 
errors, the teacher must work on improving fact accuracy through implementing a stronger motivational system and/or providing more practice on basic facts. (See Chapter 6.)
Problems involving adding or subtracting fractions with unlike denominators may be missed 
because of fact, component-skill, or strategy errors. Note the problems in Figure 13.4. The cause 
of each error and the suggested remediation procedures are provided for common mistakes.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED i
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. Below are various fraction-related problems. Describe the type each problem represents. List the 
types in their order of introduction.
3 _ □
g' 5 10
h. 5∣ × 3
2
1∙ ⅛ = τ

Chapter 13 Fractions 319
2. Write a structured worksheet presentation for teaching students how to solve the following type of 
problem:
Draw a picture for this fraction: —
3. A teacher is presenting the first lesson in which she is teaching students to decode fractions in the 
traditional manner (e.g., ⅜ is read as two-thirds). Below are four sets of examples. Which set is 
appropriate? Tell why the other three sets are not appropriate.
2 1 4
a' 3 2 5
1 1 1b. — — —8 4 9
1 3 7c. — — —8 4 6
3 7 8d. — — —4 9 4
7 1_ 2 3
3 4 9 2
111
6 5 7
112 1
6 8 4 4
2 4 8 5
9 6 6 7
j.
5
4. A student writes the mixed number five and one-third as ⅝. Specify the wording the teacher uses in 
making the correction.
5. Specify the wording the teacher uses in making the correction for the following error:
3^0
4 ^ 8
6. Identify the examples below that would not be included in an early equivalent-fraction exercise.
2 □ 5 □ 3 □a. — -- — b. - zzz --- c. — = —
3 9 7 28 4 6
4 □ 3 □ r 4 □d. -  -- — e. — ~~ --- f. - = —
5 20 5 20 6 10
7. Below are four sets of examples constructed by the teacher for an early reducing-fraction exercise. 
One set is appropriate. Three are not appropriate. Identify the inappropriate sets. Tell why they’re 
inappropriate.
8 7 6 4 5 2
a.
12 9 18 6 20 3
b. 8_ 6 4 5 3 6
12 18 6 20 12 8
c. 8 7 10 12 3 6
12 9 15 20 5 8
d. 4 5 22 8 18 5
7 20 36 16 34 9
8. Write the structured worksheet presentation used in leading students through reducing the fraction 
1¾8 to its lowest terms.
9. Below are sets of examples prepared by various teachers for an exercise in which students convert 
improper fractions to mixed numbers. Tell which sets are inappropriate.
9 11 9 12 14 12a — — .—..... ———
' 5 3 3 7 5 4
9 3 8 7 8 5 9 7b — — —— —— - - —— — ——' 4 7 2 5 3 9 3 3
9 3 5 4 7 9c — — — ——- —
' 5 7 2 9 3 2

320 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
10. Below are sets of examples prepared by several teachers for an independent worksheet exercise 
focusing on adding and subtracting fractions with unlike denominators. Tell which sets are inappropriate. Explain why.
a. 6
14 ^
3
' 8
5— +8
£ 
5
4 _
9
5
12
3
8 + 2
8
3 I 5 1 3 2 3 2 2 14 2b. — + — -  — — — + — — + - -  — - -  -  —8 5 7 4 8 8 5 3 3 2 7 5
3 2 4 2 2 2 5 13 13 2c. -  —— ——- -  — — —ι- — — — — — _|_ — — _|_ —
4 3 9 9 9 3 7 2 8 4 7 7
11. Below are examples of errors typically made by students. Specify the diagnosis and remediation for
each student.
Xavier
Z _ 1 - 1
8 6 ^ <2
25 18
Anna
Samuel
8 5
4 1 4 (2∖ 1( δ∖ 4 (2∖ 1 f δ∖ 13 3
5 2 5∖2j 2∖5 J 5∖2∕ 2∖5 J 10 10
Destiny
15 6
3 2 3 (5∖ 2(3∖ 3 f 5∖ 2(3∖ 21+ __(_) 4. _ j — = __ 4-— — ) = —
5 3 5∖3 J 3∖5 J 5∖3 J 3∖5 J 15
12. Write a structured worksheet exercise to lead students through solving this problem:
8-⅛
13. Specify the diagnosis and remediation procedures for each student.
Marquis
6 yof28
162
7
1
= 237
Sara
6yθf28 =
6
196
3
98
Diego
6 168
-of28 = ---7 7

Chapter 13 Fractions 321
Format 13.1
INTRODUCING FRACTIONS
TEACHER
Part A: Number of Parts in Each Whole
STUDENTS
(Draw the following diagram on the board.)
1. (Point to A.) I've drawn whole units on a number line. The tall lines show 
the end of each whole unit.
(Point to first tall line in A.) Here's a whole unit.
(Point to second tall line in A.) Here's a whole unit.
(Point to third tall line in A.) Here's a whole unit.
(Draw a line under the first whole unit.)
2. Look at the first whole unit. (Point.) The small lines show the parts in each 
whole unit. Count the parts inside the first whole unit.
How many parts in the first whole unit? (Write 4 for the denominator 
in the first box.)
(Underline the next whole unit.)
3. Look at the second whole unit. (Point.) Count the parts inside the second 
whole unit.
How many parts in the second whole unit? (Write 4 for the denominator in 
the second box.)
(Underline the third whole unit.)
Look at the third whole unit. (Point.) Count the parts inside the third whole 
unit. (Write 4 for the denominator in the third box.)
How many parts in the third whole unit?
There are 4 parts in each whole unit. So the bottom number of the fraction 
is 4. (Write 4 in the denominator of the fraction after line A.)
To correct:
Note: This is an important preskill. If students do not understand the number 
of parts in each whole unit, they will not write the correct denominator for 
fractions.
(First, point out to students the first whole unit on the number line.) This is 
where the first whole unit starts and where it stops. As I touch them, start 
at the beginning and count the parts in that whole unit. How many parts 
are in that unit? Now, let's count the parts in the next whole unit. How 
many parts are in that whole unit? There were 4 parts in the first whole unit 
and 4 parts in this whole unit. So how many parts are in each whole unit?
1, 2, 3, 4
4
1, 2, 3, 4
4
1, 2, 3, 4
4
continued

322 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.1 (continued)
INTRODUCING FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Repeat the procedure until students who had problems have mastered this 
part. Note that some students may have serious problems because they don't 
understand that the second unit starts where the first unit ends.)
4. (Repeat steps 1-3 for examples B and C.)
Part B: Writing the Top Part
(Draw a diagram like the one below on the board.)
1. (Point to number line A.) Count the number of parts in each whole unit. 
(Pause.) How many parts in each whole unit?
Do I write that on the bottom or the top of the fraction? (Write 4 as the 
denominator of all fractions on number line A.)
2. Now we are going to write the top numeral of the fraction right here. 
(On number line A point to the top of box 1.)
To figure out the top numeral of the fraction we count from the beginning 
and stop here. Count the parts.
Yes, when we counted from the beginning and stopped here. We have 4, so 
I write 4 on the top of the fraction.
3. Now we are going to write the numeral for the top of the fraction right 
here. (On number line A point to the top of box 2.)
Remember, to figure out the top numeral of the fraction we count from the 
beginning and stop here. Count the parts.
Yes, when we counted from the beginning and stopped here. We have 8, 
so I write 8 on the top.
4. Now we are going to write the top numeral of this fraction right here. 
(On number line A point to the top of box 3.)
Remember, to figure out the top numeral of the fraction we count from the 
beginning and stop here. Count the parts.
Yes, when we counted from the beginning and stopped here we have 12, so 
I write 12 on the top.
4
Bottom
1, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12
(Repeat steps 1-4 for examples B and C.)

Chapter 13 Fractions 323
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part C: Writing Complete Fractions
(Draw the following on the board.)
1. Now we are going to write three fractions for each number line. Look at A. 
Count the number of parts in each whole unit. (Pause.) How many parts in 
each whole unit?
So do I write that on the top or the bottom of the fraction?
Yes, I write 8 on the bottom of each fraction.
2. (Touch the first fraction box.) We are going to write a fraction right here. 
We figure out the top numeral of the fraction by counting from the 
beginning and stopping here. Count the parts.
Yes, there are 8 parts. So I write 8 on the top of this fraction.
3. (Touch the second fraction box.) We are going to write a fraction right 
here. We figure out the top numeral of the fraction by counting from the 
beginning and stopping here. Count the parts.
Yes, there are 16 parts. So I write 16 on the top of this fraction.
4. (Touch the fraction box for the shaded part.) Now, we are going to write a 
fraction for the shaded part. We figure out the top numeral of the fraction 
by counting from the beginning of the shaded part. Count the parts.
Yes, there are 21 shaded parts. So I write 21 on the top of the fraction.
(Repeat steps 1-4 for B and C.)
Part D: Structured Worksheet
(Create a worksheet for students containing examples like the following.)
8
Bottom
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 
14, 15, 16
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
10,11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 18, 19, 20, 21
continued

324 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.1 (continued)
INTRODUCING FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. You are going to write the fractions for the whole units and for the shaded 
parts. Touch A. Count the number of parts in each whole. How many parts 
in each whole unit?
Where do you write the 4?
Write 4 as the bottom numeral for each of the fractions.
4
On the bottom
2. Now you are going to write the top numeral for this whole unit. 
(Point to 1 on A.) How do we figure out the top numeral of the fraction?
Raise your hand when you are done counting. What is the top number?
Write 4 as the top numeral in the first fraction.
3. Now you are going to write the top numeral for the shaded part. How do 
we figure out the top numeral of the fraction?
Count from the 
beginning and stop here 
4
Start counting at the 
beginning of the 
shaded part
Raise your hand when you are done counting. What is the top number?
Write 6 as the top numeral for the shaded part.
4. (Point to 2 on A.) Now you are going to write the top numeral for this 
whole unit. How do we figure out the top numeral of this fraction?
Raise your hand when you are done counting. What is the top number?
Write 8 as the top numeral for that fraction.
5. (Point to 3 on A.) Now you are going to write the top numeral for this 
whole unit. How do we figure out the top number?
Raise your hand when you are done counting. What is the top number?
Write 12 as the top numeral for that fraction.
(Repeat steps 1-5 for B-D.)
6
Count from the 
beginning
8
Count from the 
beginning 
12
Format 13.2
PART-WHOLE DISCRIMINATION
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Draw the following circles on the board.)
2. (Point to the first circle.) This is a whole unit. What is this? A whole unit
(Point to the second circle.) This is a whole unit. What is this? A whole unit
How many units? 2
3. Each whole unit has parts. The parts are all the same size. Let's see how 
many parts are in each whole unit.
4. (Point to first unit.) Count the parts as I touch them. (Touch each part in the 
first circle.) 1, 2, 3
How many parts in this whole unit? 3

Chapter 13 Fractions 325
TEACHER STUDENTS
5. (Point to the second circle.) Now let's count the parts in this whole unit. 
(Touch each part as students count.)
6. How many parts in each whole unit?
7. Yes, three parts in each whole unit. Say that.
8. Now think: How many whole units?
Yes, there are 2 whole units with 3 parts in each unit.
(Repeat steps 1-8 with other examples.)
1, 2, 3
3 parts
3 parts in each whole 
unit
2
Format 13.3
WRITING NUMERICAL FRACTIONS (See Video in Part A)
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Draw the following circles on the board.)
2. We're going to learn to write fractions. Fractions tell us how many parts in 
each whole unit and how many parts are used.
3. The bottom number of a fraction tells how many parts in each whole. What 
does the bottom number tell?
Look at this picture and think: how many parts in each whole?
To correct: Let's see how many parts are in each whole. (Point to first circle.) 
Count the parts as I touch them. (Touch each part in the first circle. Repeat 
same procedures with next two circles.) There are 4 parts in this whole and 
4 parts in this whole. There are 4 parts in each whole.
So what is the bottom number of the fraction?
I'll write 4 as the bottom number. That tells us 4 parts in each whole. What 
does the 4 tell us?
4. The top number tells us how many parts are used. What does the top number 
tell us?
We find how many parts are used by counting the shaded parts. (Point to 
each shaded part.) Count as 1 touch the parts. How many parts are shaded?
So I write 5 as the top number of the fraction. (Write 5 on top.) That tells us 
5 parts are used. What does the 5 tell us?
5. I'll say what the fraction tells us. (Point to 4.) 4 parts in each whole. (Point 
to 5.) 5 parts are used.
How many parts in 
each whole
4
4
4 parts in each whole
How many parts are 
used
1, 2, 3, 4, 5
5
5 parts are used
continued

326 Part IΠ Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.3 (continued)
WRITING NUMERICAL FRACTIONS
TEACHER
6. You say what the fraction tells us. (Point to 4.)
(Point to 5.)
(Repeat steps 5-6 until students respond without hesitation. Give individual 
turns to several students.)
7. (Repeat steps 1-4 with the problems below.)
STUDENTS
4 parts in each whole
5 parts are used
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like those that follow.)
2. Touch picture a. You're going to write the fraction for the picture.
3. First we write how many parts in each whole. Where do you write the 
number of parts in each whole?
Look and see how many parts in each whole. (Pause.) How many parts in 
each whole?
Where do you write 3?
Write the number.
4. Now we write the number of parts used. Where do you write the number of 
parts used?
Count the shaded parts. (Pause.) How many parts were used?
In the bottom box
3
In the bottom box
On the top
4

Chapter 13 Fractions 327
TEACHER STUDENTS
5. Touch the bottom number. (Pause.) What does that tell us? 3 parts in each whole
Touch the top number. What does that tell us?
(Repeat steps 4-5 until students answer without hesitation. Give individual 
turns to several students on steps 4-5. Repeat steps 1-5 with remaining 
figures.)
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet similar to the one in Part B.)
Touch problem a.
4 parts are used
2. Where do you write how many parts in each whole unit? On the bottom
3. What do you write on the top?
Write the numerals.
How many parts are 
used
4. Touch the bottom number. What does it tell us? _______ parts in each 
whole
5. Touch the top number. What does the top number tell us?
(Repeat steps 1-5 with remaining examples.)
_______ parts are 
used
Format 13.4
READING FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Write the following fractions on the board.)
4 1 1 I θ 1 1 1
99447744
So far we've learned what fractions tell us to do. Today we're going to learn 
to read fractions a new way. My turn to read this fraction. (Point to 4.) Four 
(point to 9) ninths.
2. Your turn. (Point to 4, then 9.)
3. (Repeat steps 1 and 2 with half the examples on the board.)
4. (Repeat only step 2 with the remaining examples.)
To correct: Model and test correct answer; review series.
Four-ninths

328 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.5
DETERMINING WHETHER A FRACTION EQUALS, 
EXCEEDS, OR IS LESS THAN ONE WHOLE
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Pictorial Demonstrations
1. I'll draw a picture on the board. You tell me if we use up more than one 
whole, less than one whole, or just one whole (Draw the diagram below.)
2. Did I shade more than one whole, less than one whole, or just one whole? Less than one whole 
unit
Yes, less than one whole unit. Each circle has 4 parts, but I only shaded 3 parts. 
(Repeat step 2 with the examples below.)
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. We're going to learn some rules so we can tell if a fraction equals one whole 
or equals more or less than one whole without drawing a picture.
2. First rule: A fraction equals one whole when the top number and bottom 
number are the same. When does a fraction equal one whole?
3. (Write the following fraction on the board.)
4
4
(Point to the fraction.) Does this fraction equal one whole?
How do you know?
(Repeat step 3 with the problems below.)
7 2 5 1 8
4 3 5 4 8
4. Listen to these new rules: If the top number is more than the bottom number, 
the fraction equals more than one whole. When does a fraction equal more 
than one whole?
If the top number is less than the bottom number, the fraction equals less 
than one whole. When does a fraction equal less than one whole?
When the top number 
and bottom number 
are the same
Yes
The top number and 
bottom number are 
the same.
When the top number 
is more than the 
bottom number
When the top number 
is less than the bottom 
number

Chapter 13 Fractions 329
TEACHER STUDENTS
5. (Write the following fraction on board.)
3
5
Is the top number the same as the bottom number?
So does the fraction equal one whole?
Is the top number more or less than the bottom number?
So does the fraction equal more or less than one whole?
How do you know?
Yes, 5 parts in each whole and only 3 parts are used.
(Repeat step 5 with the problems below.)
3 3 3 4 4 4
4 3 2 5 4 2
Part C: Structured Worksheet
(Give students worksheets with problems like these.)
5 more 7 more 3 more
a.— equal b. — equal c. — equal
less less less
1. In these problems you have to tell if a fraction is more than one whole, 
equals one whole, or is less than one whole.
No
No
Less
Less than one whole
The top number is 
less than the bottom 
number.
2. Read the fraction in problem a. 5
4
3. Does the fraction equal one whole? No
4. Is the top number more or less than the bottom number? 
So does the fraction equal more or less than one whole? 
Put a circle around the word "more." 
(Repeat steps 1-4 with remaining problems.)
More
More than one whole
Format 13.6
READING AND WRITING MIXED NUMERALS
continued
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Pictorial Demonstrations
(Draw the following diagrams on the board.)
1. You're going to learn how to write the fraction in this picture a new way. 
First, let's write the fraction the old way. How many parts in each whole? 4

330 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.6 (continued)
READING AND WRITING MIXED NUMERALS
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. Where do I write it?
Write it.
3. How many parts are used?
4. Where do I write it?
Write it.
5. Now we're going to write the fraction as a mixed number. A mixed number 
has a whole number and a fraction. What does a mixed number have?
6. First we count the number of wholes used up. Count as I point. How many 
wholes are used?
So I write 3 in the box. (Write 3 in the box.)
7. Now we write the fraction to tell about the whole not used. (Point to the last 
circle.) What do I write as the bottom number in the fraction?
(Write 4.)
To correct: There are 4 parts in each whole.
What do I write as the top number in the fraction?
(Write 2.)
To correct: There are 2 parts shaded. The fraction that tells about the whole 
not used says ¾.
8. The mixed number says three and two-fourths, hat does the mixed number 
say?
There are 3 whole units used and ¾ of another whole unit used.
On the bottom
14
On the top
A whole number and 
a fraction
3
4
2
4
(Repeat steps 1-8 with these examples.)
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following on the board.)
2. A mixed number is a whole number and a fraction. What is a mixed number?
3. (Point to: 2⅛.)
What's the whole number?
What's the fraction?
A whole number and 
a fraction
2
2
3

Chapter 13 Fractions 331
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. My turn. We read this mixed number as two and one-third. How do we read J
this mixed number? ⅛
5. (Write the following on the board.)
3j8
What's the whole number? 3
What's the fraction? 2
Q
Read the mixed number.
o
2
38
(Repeat step 5with these mixed numbers.) 
5∣ 4 4 47 2 5 2
Part C: Structured Worksheet
1. Listen: 2¾. Say that. 4
What is the whole number?
I write 2 so that it takes up the whole space.
(Model writing on the board or document camera.)
2
2
2. Listen 2¾. What is the fraction? 3
4
I write the fraction line in the middle of the space next to the 2. Then
I write the fraction numbers small. (Model writing on the board or document 
camera.)
32~4
3. What is the mixed number? 3
⅛
(Repeat steps 1-3 with the problems below.)
7— 4—2 5
(Give students lined paper.)
4. Now it's your turn. You're going to write the mixed number 5⅜. What 52
mixed number are you going to write? 53
5. Listen: 5⅜. What is the whole number? 5
Write it. Make it big so that it touches both lines. (Monitor responses.)
6. Listen: 5⅜. What is the fraction? 2
3
Put the fraction line right in the middle of the space next to the 5. Then 
write ⅜. Write the numbers small.
J
continued

332 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.6 (continued)
READING AND WRITING MIXED NUMERALS
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Repeat steps 4-6 with these numbers.)
4 ⅛ 4 4
7. Listen: 3⅝. Say it. 3^
Write it. (Monitor responses. Repeat step 7 with the following mixed numbers.) 
4 4 4 4
6
Format 13.7
PRESKILL: CONSTRUCTING FRACTIONS EQUAL TO 1
TEACHER
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. Here's a rule: When the top number is the same as the bottom, the fraction 
equals one whole. When does a fraction equal one whole?
2. (Write the following on the board.)
□
5
What number is on the bottom of this fraction?
What fraction with a 5 as the bottom number equals one whole?
7^o correct: A fraction equals 1 when the top number is the same as the 
bottom number. What's the bottom number? What must the top number be?
(Repeat step 2.)
Yes, ⅝ equals one whole.
(Repeat step 2 with these problems.)
□ □ □ □
8 3 6 9
Part B: Structured Worksheet
(Give students worksheets with examples like these.)
STUDENTS
When the top number 
is the same as the 
bottom number
5
5
5
1. When does a fraction equal one whole?
2. Touch problem a. It says 1 equals how many fourths? Read the problem.
When the top number 
is the same as the 
bottom number
1 equals how many 
fourths?

Chapter 13 Fractions 333
TEACHER STUDENTS
3. Tell me the fraction with 4 as a denominator that equals one whole. Yes, ¾ 
equals one whole.
4. Fill in the missing number.
(Repeat steps 1-4 with remaining problems.)
4
4
Students write 4 in box.
Format 13.8
COMPUTING EQUIVALENT FRACTIONS
TEACHER
(See Video in Part A)
STUDENTS
Part A: Pictorial Demonstrations
1. Fractions are equivalent when they show the same amounts. (Draw these 
figures on clear plastic sheets. The circles should be the same size. Use a 
different color for each figure as in the video.)
2. This is a picture of 5∕10. (Point to first figure.) This is picture of ½. (Point to 
second figure.)
3. Would a person who had 5∕10 of a pie have the same amount as a person 
who had ½ a pie?
To correct: (Place one figure on top of the other. Outline the shaded part.) 
See, the shaded portion is the same size in both pies.
4. So are 5∕10 and ½ equivalent fractions?
5. Yes, 5∕10 and ½ both use the same amount of a whole.
(Repeat steps 1-5 with these pairs.)
Yes
Yes
Part B: Multiplying by 1
1. When you multiply by 1, the answer equals the number you start with.
2. (Write the following problem on the board.)
I×,
What number do we start with?
Will our answer equal 1?
How do you know?
(Repeat step 2 with the following problems.)
3
8
Yes
We are multiplying by 1
continued

334 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.8 (continued)
COMPUTING EQUIVALENT FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
3. Here's a rule about fractions: When you multiply by a fraction that equals 1, 
your answer equals the number you start with. Listen, again. (Repeat rule.)
4. (Write the following problem on the board.)
4 2
8 X 2
What fraction do we start with?
What are we multiplying ⅝ by?
5. Does ⅜ equal 1?
So will our answer equal 4/e?
How do you know?
(Repeat steps 4 and 5 with the problems below.)
4 4 5 3— × — — × —8 4 6 6
5 2 3 8- × — - × -6 3 9 8
7 9 2 4- × - - × -2 9 4 4
4
8
2
2
Yes
Yes
We are multiplying by 
a fraction that equals 1.
Part C: Structured Board Problems
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
-∩ = —
3 U 12
2. We don't change the value of a fraction when we multiply it by a fraction 
that equals 1.
3. These parentheses indicate multiplication. We're going to multiply ⅛ by a 
fraction that equals 1. We have to figure out the fraction that equals 1.
4. We are going to end with a fraction that has the same value as ⅜. 
(Point to 12.)
What's the denominator of the fraction we end with?
Three times what number equals 12?
So we multiply by a fraction that has a denominator of 4.
5. (Write 4 inside parentheses.)
2f∖ = —
3∖4∕ 12
12
4

Chapter 13 Fractions 335
(Write a four in the numerator inside parentheses.)
2∕4∖ _ □
3 ∖4√ “ 12
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. The fraction inside the parentheses must equal 1. If the bottom number is 4, 
what must the numerator be? 4
3∖4∕ 12
Yes, we multiply ⅜ by %. What do we multiply 2∕3 by? 4
4
7. We figured out the fraction equal to 1 that we're multiplying by. Let's 
multiply and figure out how many twelfths ⅜ equals. 2×4 = how many?
(Write the problem on the board.)
2∕4∖ 8
8
8. We multiplied ⅜ by a fraction that equals 1 and ended with 8/i2; 
⅜ equals 8∕12.
(Repeat steps 1-8 with these problems.)
3 = _□ 2 = □ 2 = □
5 10 3 15 7 ~ 21
Part D: Structured Worksheet
(Give students a worksheet with problems similar to these.)
3/ ∖ □ . 5/ A □ 1 / ∖ □
4∖√ 8 9∖ 7 27 4∖ J 20
. 2/ ∖ □ 3/ ∖ □ , 2/ ∖ □
5 ∖ 7 20 5∖ 7 35 3 V ) 12
1. Touch problem a. It says ¾ Equals how many eighths? What does the 
problem say?
3 , ,— equals how many 
eighths?
2. We have to multiply ¾ by a fraction that equals 1. What is the denominator 
of the fraction we start with?
What is the denominator of the fraction we end with?
Four times what number equals 8?
Write 2 as the denominator in the parentheses.
3. We're multiplying ¾ by a fraction that equals 1. What fraction with a 
denominator of 2 equals one whole?
Write 2 as a numerator in the parentheses.
4. We figured out the fraction equal to 1. Now what do we multiply to figure 
out the missing numerator?
What is 3 × 2?
Write 6 in the box.
4
8
2
2
2
3 X 2
6
5. What fraction equals ¾7 6
8
6. How do you know that ¾ equals 6/s? We multiplied by a 
fraction that equals 1.
(Repeat steps 1-6 with remaining problems.)
continued

336 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.8 (continued)
COMPUTING EQUIVALENT FRACTIONS
TEACHER
Part E: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like the one below. Note that 
parentheses aren't written in.)
~ = ∏ b - = — ι = ∏a' 6 12 b' 4 20 c' 3 12
j 1 □ 2 □ 3 □d. — = — e. — = — f. —= —5 20 5 15 7 14
2. Touch problem a. Read the problem.
3. We must multiply ⅛ by a fraction that equals 1. To keep the fractions 
equal, put parentheses next to ⅝.
4. Look at the numbers and get ready to tell me what we must multiply ⅝ by. 
To correct: What is the denominator of the fraction we start with? What is 
the bottom number of the fraction we end with? Six times what number 
equals 12? That's the denominator. The fraction we're multiplying equals 1. 
What fraction goes in the parentheses?
Write ⅜ in the parentheses.
5. Multiply and write in the missing numerator.
6. What fraction does ⅝ Equal?
(Repeat steps 2-6 with remaining problems.)
STUDENTS
— equals how many 6
twelfths?
10
12
2
2
Format 13.9
PRESKILL: DETERMINING FACTORS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Introducing the Concept
1. (Write the following problems on board.)
5 X 3 = 15
9 × 2 = 18
7 X 6 = 42
Factors are numbers that are multiplied together.
2. Read the first problem.
What numbers are being multiplied?
So 5 and 3 are factors of 15. What are two factors of 15?
5 X 3 = 15
5 and 3
5 and 3
3. Look at the board and tell me two factors of 18. 9 and 2
4. Look at the board and tell me two factors of 42. 7 and 6

Chapter 13 Fractions 337
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write 12 on board.)
We want to list all of the factors for 12, beginning with the smallest factor.
Listen: A number multiplied by 1 always equals itself. So is 1 a factor of 12? Yes
Yes, 1 is a factor of 12. What number times 1 equals 12?
12 and 1 are factors of 12; 12 is the largest factor of 12; 1 is the smallest factor 
of 12.
We're going to make a list of the factors of 12.
Let's start with 1 × 12.
(Write 1 × 12.)
2.1 is the smallest factor of 12.
Let's find the next larger number we can multiply and end with 12. I'll say 
some numbers. You say stop when I come to a number that is a factor of 12.
12
Listen, 2
To correct: (If students don't say stop at 2, say,) We can multiply 2 and end 
with 12, so 2 is a factor of 12.
Stop
Yes, 2 is the next largest factor of 12. 2 times what number equals 12?
So 6 is the other factor of 12 that goes with 2.
Let's add 2 × 6 to our list of factors of 12. (Write 2 × 6.)
1 × 12.
2 × 6
3. Let's find the next largest factor of 12. I'll say some numbers. You say stop
6
when I come to a factor of 12. We already have 1 and 2. Listen, 3.
To correct: (If students don't say stop at 3, say,) We can multiply 3 and end 
with 12, so 2 is a factor of 12.
Yes, 3 is a factor of 12.
Stop
3 times what other number equals 12?
So 4 is the other factor of 12 that goes with 3.
Let's add 3 × 4 to our list of factors of 12. (Write 3 × 4.)
1 × 12
2 × 6
3 × 4
4. Listen, my turn. 1 know there are no more factors of 12. How do I know? 
Because the next number after 3 is 4, and we already have that number. We 
have all the factors of 12.
4
Your turn. Do we have all the factors of 12? Yes
How do you know? Because the next 
number after 3 is 4, 
and we already have 
that number.
continued

338 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.9 (continued)
PRESKILL: DETERMINING FACTORS
TEACHER STUDENTS
5. When we say the factors of a number, we read the numbers in order, and 
we don't have to say times.
My turn to say all the factors of 12: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12. (Point to the numerals as 
you say them )
Your turn. Say all the factors of 12.
6. (Write 10 on board.)
We want to list all of the factors for 10, beginning with the smallest factor.
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12
Listen: A number multiplied by 1 always equals itself. So is 1 a factor of 10?
Yes, 1 is a factor of 10. What number times 1 equals 10?
10 and 1 are factors of 10; 10 is the largest factor of 10; 1 is the smallest
Yes
factor of 10.
Let's begin our list of factors of 10 with 1 × 10 (Write 1 × 10.)
1 × 10
7. Let's find the next largest number we can multiply and end with 10. I'll say 
some numbers. You say stop when I come to a number that is a factor of 10.
10
1 is the smallest factor of 10. What number comes next?
Is 2 a factor of 10?
2
To correct: (If students say no, say,) We can multiply 2 and end with 10, 
so 2 is a factor of 10.
Yes, so 2 is the next largest factor of 10.
2 times what number equals 10?
Yes
So 5 is the other factor of 10 that goes with 2.
Let's add 2 × 5 to our list of factors of 10. (Write 2 × 5.)
1 X 10
2 × 5
8. Let's find the next largest factor of 10. I'll say some numbers. You say stop 
when I come to a factor of 10. We already have 1 and 2. Listen: 3 (pause),
5
4 (pause), 5 (pause).
To correct: (If students say stop at 3 or 4) We can't multiply that number 
and end with 10.
Stop
Yes, 5 is a factor of 10. Do we already have 5? Yes
9. So, do we have all the factors of 10? Yes
How do you know?
10. When we say the factors of a number, we read the numbers in order, and 
we don't have to say times.
Because the next 
number was 5, and 
we already have that 
number.
Your turn. Say all the factors of 10.
(Repeat Part B with additional examples.)
1, 2, 5, 10

Chapter 13 Fractions 339
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part C: Structured Worksheet
(Give students worksheets with problems like those below and instructions to list 
all the factors for each number.)
a. 16
b. 12
c. 7
1. (Touch a.) What is the smallest factor of 16? 1
What is the other factor that goes with 1 to equal 16? Write 1 times 16 on the 
first line. (Write 1 × 16.) 16
2. 1 is the smallest factor of 16.
What is the next largest factor of 16? 2
What is the other factor that goes with 2 to equal 16? 8
Write 2 × 8 below 1 × 16. (Write 2 × 8.)
1 × 16
2 × 8
What is the next largest factor of 16? 4
What is the other factor that goes with 4 to equal 16? 4
Write 4 × 4 below 2 × 8. (Write 4 × 4.)
1 × 16
2 × 8
4 × 4
3. Are there any more factors of 16? No
How do you know? Because the next
4. Say all the factors of 16.
number was 8, and 
we already have that 
number.
1, 2, 4, 8, 16
(Repeat steps 1-4 with new target numbers. Have students do remaining 
problems on their own.)
Format 13.10
DETERMINING THE GREATEST COMMON FACTOR (GCF)
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Present students with a worksheet with the following 
problems.)
a. What is the greatest common factor of 12 and 16?
b. What is the greatest common factor of 10 and 5?
c. What is the greatest common factor of 4 and 7?
d. What is the greatest common factor of 10 and 15?
e. What is the greatest common factor of 18 and 9?
f. What is the greatest common factor of 12 and 9?
continued

340 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.10 (continued)
DETERMINING THE GREATEST COMMON FACTOR (GCF)
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. Find problem a on your worksheet. Read the directions. What is the greatest common factor 
of 12 and 16?
Let's find the greatest common factor of 12 and 16. The 
greatest common factor is the largest number that is a 
factor of 12 and 16. What is the largest number that is a 
factor of 12? 12
Is 12 a factor of 16? No
12 cannot be the greatest common factor of 12 and 16. 
Why? Because 12 is not a factor of 16
3. What is the next largest factor of 12? 6
Is 6 a factor of 16? No
6 is not a factor of 12 and 16. Why? Because 6 is not a factor of 16
4. What is the next largest factor of 12? 4
Is 4 also a factor of 16? Yes
So what number is the greatest common factor of 12 
and 16?
4
5. Write 4. (Check students' responses.)
(Repeat steps 2-5 with remaining problems.)
Format 13.11
REDUCING FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
— - O
12 ∖ J
2. We're going to reduce this fraction. First, we determine the 
greatest common factor of the numerator and denominator. 
What do we do first when we reduce a fraction?
3. We want to reduce 8∕12. What is the greatest common factor
of 8 and 12? (Pause.)
To correct: Tell the correct answer. Explain why student's 
answer is incorrect.
Determine the greatest common 
factor of the numerator and 
denominator
4

Chapter 13 Fractions 341
TEACHER
4. So we write a fraction equal to 1 inside the parentheses using 
the greatest common factor. What's the fraction equal to 1 
using the greatest common factor?
(Write the new fraction on the board.)
8 _ ∕4λ
12 ” ∖4∕--------5. Let's figure out the numerator of the reduced fraction. 
(Point to symbols as you read.)
8 = 4 × what number? (Pause.)
(Write the 2.)
8 = ∕4λ 2
12 ~ ∖4√
6. Let's figure out the denominator of the reduced fraction. 
(Point to symbols as you read.)
12 = 4 × what number? (Pause.)
(Write the 3.)
8 = ∕4∖ 2
12 “ W3
7. The fraction in parentheses equals 1. We don't change the 
value of a fraction when we multiply by 1, so we can cross 
out ⅜. (Cross out.)
The reduced fraction is ⅜. What is the reduced fraction?
2
3
8. Read the statement.
STUDENTS
4
4
2
3
8 = 2
12 ~ 3
(Repeat steps 1-8 with these problems.)
15√∖ 9 = O lθ = ( A20 ~ ∖ √--------- 36 ∖ √--------- 24 ∖ )--------Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like those below.)
2. We're going to reduce these fractions. How do you reduce 
fractions?
3. Touch problem a. Read the fraction.
4. What is the greatest common factor of 10 and 15?
5. So what fraction do you write in the parentheses?
Write it. (Pause.)
Pull out the greatest common factor of 
the numerator and the denominator
10
15
5
5
5
continued

342 Part HI Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.11 (continued)
REDUCING FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. The numbers across the top of the fraction say 10 = 5 × 
what number? What do the numbers across the top say?
7. What do the numbers across the bottom say?
8. Fill in the numerator and denominator in the reduced 
fraction. (Monitor students as they write 2 and 3.)
Cross out the fraction of 1 in the parentheses. (Pause.)
9. What is the reduced fraction?
10. Read the statement.
(Repeat steps 2-10 with remaining problems.)
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Present a worksheet like the following. Note that 
parentheses are not written.)
Reduce these fractions:
a' 20 b. — 12 C 18
d4 8 e. — f.-7 16 8
2. How do you reduce a fraction?
3. Read fraction a.
10 = 5 × what number?
15 = 5 × what number?
2
3
10 _ 2
15 3
Pull out the greatest common factor of 
the numerator and the denominator
15
20
4. Make an equal sign. Then write parentheses on the other side 
of the equal.
5. What fraction are you going to write in the parentheses? 
(Pause.)
5
5
To correct: What is the greatest common factor of
and? (Repeat 
steps 4 and 5.)
6. Write ⅝ in the parentheses. Then figure out the reduced 
fraction. (Pause.)
7. Cross out the fraction of 1. (Check.)
8. What is the reduced fraction?
9. Read the statement.
(Repeat steps 2-9 with remaining problems.)
15Students write — =
3
4
15 = 3
20 “ 4

Chapter 13 Fractions 343
Format 13.12
CONVERTING IMPROPER FRACTIONS
TO MIXED NUMBERS (See Video in Part A)
TEACHER STUDENTS
o
Part A: Pictorial Demonstration
1. (Write the following diagram on the board.) 
woo
2. (Point to 7⅜) Read this fraction. 13
3. Does 1⅜ equal more than one whole unit?
□
Yes
4. Let's make a picture and see how many whole units 1⅜ makes.
5. (Draw the following circles on the board.)
How many parts in each whole? 5
6. (Shade in 13 parts.) How many parts do we use up? 13
7. Let's see how many whole units are used. (Point to first circle.) Is this 
whole unit used? Yes
(Point to second circle.) Is this whole unit used? Yes
(Point to third circle.) Is this whole unit used? No
How many whole units are used? 2
Two whole units are used. Let's look at the last unit and count. How 
many parts are used? 3
And how many parts in each whole? 5
So, we can say ⅜ of a unit. We have 2 whole units and ⅜ of another 
unit. (Write 23∕s.)
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. We’re going to learn a fast way to figure out how many whole units in 
a fraction. We divide by the number of parts in each whole unit. What Divide by the number of
do we do to figure out how many whole units? parts in each whole unit
(Write the following on the board.) 
13
5
Read this fraction. 13 
ς
Is this fraction equal to, more than, or less than one unit?
□
More than one unit
continued

344 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.12 (continued)
CONVERTING IMPROPER FRACTIONS 
TO MIXED NUMBERS
TEACHER STUDENTS
2.1 want to figure out how many whole units are in this fraction. How 
many parts in each whole?
So I divide by 5. (Write the problem.)
5∏3
3. Let's divide. (Point to box.) How many fives in 13?
(Write 2.) ∖Ne have 2 whole units. (Point under 13.) What number do I 
write here?
(Write -10 under 13.)
2
10
5jT3
-10
4. We used10 parts in 2 wholes. Now let's subtract and see how many 
parts we have left. What is 13 - 10?
5. Since we started with a fraction, we write the remainder as a fraction. 
Remember, there are 5 parts in each whole. (Point to 5 in 5JT3J
So we write 5 as the denominator of the fraction. (Write 5.) How many 
parts are remaining?
So I write 3 as the numerator of the fraction. (Write the 3.)
3
3
5jT3
10
3
6. Tell me the mixed number for the fraction 1⅜.
Yes, 2⅜ is the same as 1⅜.
7. (Write 23∕s next to 13∕5.) Read the statement.
(Repeat steps 1-7 with 12∕7 and ¾.)
Part C: Structured Worksheet
2i
'3 =? 
5 5
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like the following.)

Chapter 13 Fractions 345
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. Touch problem a. Read the fraction. 11
Is 1¼ less than 1, equal to 1, or more than 1?
4
More than 1
So you have to change 1¼ to a mixed number. How many parts 
in each whole? 4
So you divide 4 into 11.
3. Write the division problem. Students write 4jTΓ
How many 4s in 11? 2
We can make two whole units. Write the 2 in the big box. Multiply and 
subtract to find how many parts are left. (Pause.) How many parts are 
left? 3
4. Now let's figure out the fraction remainder. The denominator of the 
fraction tells how many parts in each whole. How many parts in each 
whole? 4
So write 4 as the denominator of the fraction. Students write 4 in the
What do you write for the numerator?
bottom box of the fraction.
3
Write it.
5. What mixed number does 1¼ equal?
2Σ
Say the whole statement. 11 _ 3
(Repeat steps 2-5 with remaining problems.)
Part D: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Present a worksheet like the following.)
Rewrite the fractions that equal more than 1 as mixed numbers.
12 , 3a. — b. —5 4
15 λ 5
cτ d5
2. Some of these fractions equal more than one whole unit. If a fraction 
equals more than one whole unit, change it to a mixed number. What
4 ~ 2 4
Change it to a mixed
are you going to do if a fraction equals more than one unit? number
If the fraction does not equal more than one whole unit, don't do 
anything.
3. Touch problem a. (Pause.) Read the fraction. 12
Does the fraction equal more or less than one unit?
5
More than one unit
The fraction equals more than one unit, so what must you do? Change it to a mixed
What do you divide by?
number
5
Say the division problem. 5 goes into 12
continued

346 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.12 (continued)
CONVERTING IMPROPER FRACTIONS
TO MIXED NUMBERS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Write the problem and work it. (Pause.)
Remember to write the whole number as a big number and the 
numerator and denominator small.
4.1⅜ equals what mixed number? ∑1
(Repeat steps 2-4 with remaining problems.)
5
Format 13.13
CONVERTING MIXED NUMBERS TO IMPROPER FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation - Converting Whole Numbers
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
6'7
2. This problem says 6 wholes equal how many fourths. What does the 6 wholes equal how
problem say? many fourths
3. We want to figure out how many parts are used when we have 
6 wholes. How many parts in each whole? 4
4. We're talking about the same number again and again, so we multiply 
6 × 4. What numbers do we multiply? 6 × 4
5. What is 6 × 4? 24
6. Yes, 6 whole units equal 24 fourths. If we use 6 whole units and there 
are 4 parts in each unit, we use 24 parts.
(Repeat steps 1-6 with the problems below.)
5-T 2-6 4 5 6 = τ
Part B: Structured Worksheet - Converting Whole Numbers
1. (Give students worksheets with problems such as the ones below.)
a.5 = y b. 2 =—
C. 7 = y d. 5 = y2 9
2. Touch problem a. (Pause.) Read the problem. 5 equals how many thirds
3. How many parts in each whole unit? 3
How many whole units? 5
4. What do we do to figure out how many parts are used? Multiply
Yes, we multiply 5 × 3. Multiply and write your answer in the box.

Chapter 13 Fractions 347
TEACHER
5. Five equals how many thirds?
Say the whole statement.
STUDENTS
J5
3
-4
(Repeat steps 1-5 with several problems, and then have the students 
complete the rest independently.)
Part C: Structured Board Presentation - Converting Mixed Numbers
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
4^
2. This problem says 6¼ equals how many fourths. What does this 
problem say?
3. First we figure out how many fourths in 6 whole units. Then we add on 
¼. (Write + between 6 and ¼) What do we do first?
4. There are 6 wholes with 4 parts in each whole. What do I do to figure 
how many parts are used?
5. What is 6 × 4 (Pause.)
(Write the 24.)
„ 1 24 + 16 + - =---------4 4
6. How many parts are used in the last whole?
7 .1 add one part. (Write + 1 in the numerator.)
_ 1 24 + 16 + - =---------- =4 4
8. What is 24 + 1?
(Write the following on the board.)
25
4
1 259. So 6- = —. Say that.4 4
(Repeat steps 1-9 with these fractions.)
4 4 4 4
16— equals how many fourths
Figure out how many 
fourths in six whole units
Multiply 6 × 4
24
25
β1 -25
1
Part D: Structured Worksheet - Converting Mixed Numbers
1. (Present a worksheet like the one below.)
Convert these mixed numbers to improper fractions.
-4=— = —
b,7∣- ---------------- = ---------------continued

348 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.13 (continued)
CONVERTING MIXED NUMBERS TO IMPROPER FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
-h— = —
d4=-------------------------------------2. Read the mixed number in problem a.
3. How many parts in each whole unit?
Write 2 as the denominator in the new fraction.
4. First we see how many halves in 3 whole units. Then we add ½. How 
do we figure out how many halves in 3 wholes?
How many halves in 3 wholes?
Write 6.
5. How many parts in the last whole?
Write + 1.
6. What is ⅛ + ½7
Write equals ⅛.
7. What fraction does 3⅛ equal?
(Repeat steps 2-7 with remaining problems.)
4
2
Students write 2.
Multiply 3 × 2
6
1
_ . ■ 6+1Students write „ . 2
7
2
7
2
Format 13.14
ADDING AND SUBTRACTING FRACTIONS WITH LIKE
DENOMINATORS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Pictorial Demonstration
1. (Draw the following circles and lines on the board.)
____  + ____ = ____
2. Let's write a problem that will tell us how many parts are used 
in these wholes.
3. How many parts in each whole?
(Write the denominators.)
4 + 4 ~ 4
We're talking about wholes with 4 parts in each whole.
4

Chapter 13 Fractions 349
TEACHER
4. (Point to first circle.) How many parts are used in this whole?
(Write the following on the board.)
3
4
(Point to second circle.) How many parts are used in this whole?
(Write the following on the board.)
3 2
4 + 4 ~
5. How many parts are used altogether?
(Write the following on the board.)
5
4
6. What does — + .equal?4 4
(Repeat steps 1-6 with the problem below.)
STUDENTS 
7"
2
5
5
4
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. We can only add and subtract fractions with the same number of parts 
in each whole. Listen again. We can only add and subtract fractions 
with the same number of parts in each whole. (Write the problem on 
the board.)
2. Read this problem.
3. (Point to ¾,) How many parts in each whole?
(Point to 2∕s.) How many parts in each whole?
4
5
4. Can we add these fractions?
5. Right. We can only add fractions that have the same bottom number.
(Repeat steps 2-5 with the problems below.)
No
3 2 5 3 3 3— _|_ — — —— - — —
5 5 7 9 9 5
4 2_  I _ 5 5 4 _ 3
7 7 7 9 9 9
(Give individual turns.)
continued

350 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.14 (continued)
ADDING AND SUBTRACTING FRACTIONS WITH LIKE
DENOMINATORS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part C: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give the students a worksheet with the following problems.)
2. Remember, you can only add and subtract fractions that tell about the 
same number of parts in each whole.
3. Touch problem a. Read the problem.
4. Can we add these fractions the way they are now?
(If the answer to step 3 is no, say to students,) You can't work the 
problem, so cross it out. If the answer to step 3 is yes, do steps 4-6.)
5. We're talking about fractions with 5 parts in each whole, so the answer 
will have 5 parts in each group. Write 5 as the bottom number in the 
answer. (Check students' work.)
6. Look at the top numbers. They tell the number of parts used. What is
3 + 1?
3 1
5 + 5
Yes
4
So what do you write for the top number in the answer?
Write it. (Check students' work.)
7. Read the whole problem.
(Repeat steps 2-7 for the remaining problems.)
Part D: Less Structured Worksheet
4
3 1- + - =5 5
4
5
1. (Give students a worksheet with a mix of four addition and four 
subtraction problems. About half of the problems should have like 
denominators.)
2. Read the first problem. If you can work it, write the answer. If you can't 
work the problem, cross it out. (Monitor student performance as they 
complete the worksheet.)

Chapter 13 Fractions 351
Format 13.15
PRESKILL: FINDING THE LEAST COMMON MULTIPLE
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following numbers on the board.)
3 6 9 12 15 18
5 10 15 20 25
2. (Point to 3.) These numbers are multiples of 3. Say them.
(Point to 5.) These numbers are multiples of 5. Say them.
3. What is the smallest number that is a multiple of 3 and 5?
Yes, 15 is the least common multiple of 3 and 5.
(Repeat steps 1-3 with these examples: 2 and 8, 6 and 8, 3 and 9.)
Part B: Worksheet Presentation
1. (Give the students a worksheet with the following problems.)
Write the number which is the least common multiple for each pair of 
numbers.
a. The LCM of 6 and 9 is.
b. The LCM of 8 and 6 is.
c. The LCM of 5 and 2 is.
d. The LCM of 5 and 4 is.
e. The LCM of 6 and 12 is.
f. The LCM of 4 and 3 is.
g. The LCM of 6 and 2 is.
h. The LCM of 4 and 12 is.
i. The LCM of 5 and 3 is.
j. The LCM of 3 and 9 is.
2. The instructions tell us to find the least common multiple of the 
numbers. LCM means "least common multiple." In problem a you 
must find the least common multiple of 6 and 9. The least common 
multiple is the lowest number that is in both count-by series.
3. Touch problem a. Say the numbers that are multiples of 6. 
(Stop students at 30.)
4. Say the numbers that are multiples of 9. (Stop students at 45.)
5. What is the least common multiple of 9 and 6?
Write it in the space.
(Repeat steps 3-5 with about half of the problems, then have the 
students complete the rest independently.)
3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18
5, 10, 15, 20, 25
15
6, 12, 18, 24, 30
9, 18, 27, 36, 45
18

352 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.16
ADDING AND SUBTRACTING FRACTIONS
WITH UNLIKE DENOMINATORS
TEACHER
(See Video in Part A)
STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
2. Read this problem.
Can we add these fractions the way they are written?
3. To work this problem, we must rewrite the fractions so they both 
have the same denominator. First, we figure out the least common 
multiple of the denominators. What is the denominator of the first 
fraction?
2 1
3 + 4
No
What is the denominator of the second fraction?
4. What is the least common multiple of 4 and 3?
To correct: Say the numbers that are multiples of 3. Say the numbers 
that are multiples of 4. What is the least common multiple?
5. We must rewrite each fraction as equivalent fractions with 
denominators of 12. (Write 12 under each denominator.)
3
4
12
2
3
12
2 
4 
12
I want to rewrite ⅜ as a fraction that has 12 as a denominator.
Remember, I don't want to change the value of ⅜. What fraction do 
I multiply ⅛ by to end with a fraction that has a denominator of 12?
To correct: What is the denominator of ⅜7 What must I multiply 3 
by to end with 12? So I must multiply ⅜ times ¾. What do I multiply 
⅜ by?
(Write ¾ in parentheses.)
2∕4Λ
3∖4∕
12
1^ 
4 
12
What is 2 × 4?
(Write 8.) What is 3 × 4?
(Cross out⅞ Write the 12.)
8
-(-} + -3∖βJ + 4
12 12
We rewrote ⅛ as 8/i2? What did we rewrite ⅜ as?
8
12
8
12
4
4

Chapter 13 Fractions 353
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. Now let's rewrite ¼ as a fraction that has 12 as a denominator. 
Remember, I don't want to change the value of ¼. What fraction 
must I multiply ¼ by?
To correct: What is the denominator of ¼7 What do I multiply 4 by 
to end with 12? So I must multiply ¼ by ⅜. What do I multiply ¼ by?
3
3
(Write 3∕3.)
8
3∖a)
12
+
L U ∣ L U
What is 1 × 3?
(Cross out ¼. Write 3 next to the 1.) What is 4 × 3?
(Write 3∕i2.)
8 3
2√4λ X(3∖
3W + A∖z)
12 ιa
3
12
We rewrote ¼ as 3∕12. What did we rewrite ¼ as?
7. Now the denominators are the same and we can add. The problem 
now says 8∕12 + 3∕12. What does the problem say?
8. Whatis8∕12 + V12?
3
12
8
12
3
12
11
12
(Repeat steps 1-8 with the problems below.)
4 _ 3 _ 2 2 2
5 10 6 4 9 + 3
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students worksheets with problems like the ones below.)
2. Read problem a.
∩ c r ω
L U I N J kθ ∣ N J C D I L Π 
I +  I
L Π I L U L U ∣ N J 4 ≥ * I N J 
I I I I I I
-h fD Q.
5 _ 2 =
10 5”
7 _ 2
9 3 ^^
2 _ 1 =
5 3 Can we work the problem the way it is?
(If the answer is yes, tell the students to work the problem. If the 
answer is no, continue the format.)
Why not?
3. What are the denominators?
What is the least common multiple of 6 and 4?
Write 12 under each fraction.
5 _ 2
6 4
No
The denominators aren't 
the same
6 and 4
12
continued

354 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.16 (continued)
ADDING AND SUBTRACTING FRACTIONS
WITH UNLIKE DENOMINATORS
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. The first fraction says ⅝. Write parentheses next to it. (Pause.) What 
fraction do you multiply ⅝ by so that you'll end with a denominator 
of 12?
Write ⅜ in the parentheses. (Check.)
To correct: The denominator is 6; 6 times what number equals 12? So 
we must multiply a fraction that has 2 as a denominator. We don't 
want to change the value of ⅝, so we multiply it by ⅜.
Let's multiply ⅝ by ⅜ and write the new fraction. What is 5 × 2?
Write 10 over the fraction. Five-sixths equals how many twelfths?
2
2
10
10
12
(Cross out 5/6.)
5. The second fraction says ¾. Write parentheses next to it. What 
fraction do you multiply ¾ by so that you'll end with a denominator 
of 12?
To correct: Use the same correction described in step 4.
Multiply ¾ by ⅜ and write the new fraction. (Pause.) Two-fourths 
equals how many twelfths?
3
3
6
12
(Check students' papers.) Cross out ¾.
6. Read the problem saying the rewritten fractions. 10 _ 6
12 12
Can you work the problem now?
How do you know?
7. Work the problem and write the answer. (Pause.)
8. What is the answer?
Yes
The denominators are the same
4
12
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet like the one for the structured worksheet 
exercise. Use the following prompts to guide the students through 
the worksheet.)
2. Read problem a. Can we work the problem the way it is? (If the 
answer is yes, tell students to work the problem. If the answer is no, 
continue the format.)
Why not?
3. What is the least common multiple of the denominators?
Write it under the fraction. (Pause.)
4. What fraction will you multiply the first fraction by so that it will 
have a denominator of ?
5. What fraction will you multiply the second fraction by so that it has 
a denominator of ?

Chapter 13 Fractions 355
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. Rewrite the fractions and work the problem. (Monitor students' 
responses.)
7. What is your answer?
(Repeat Steps 2-7 with about half of the problems, then have the 
students complete the rest independently.)
Format 13.17
MULTIPLYING TWO PROPER FRACTIONS
TEACHER
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
2. Read this problem.
3. We work multiplication problems with fractions by multiplying 
top times the top and bottom times the bottom. How do we work 
multiplication problems with fractions?
4. First we multiply top times the top. What is 3 × 2?
(Write the 6.)
3 2
4 5
5. Now we multiply bottom times the bottom. What is 4 × 5? 
(Write the 20.)
3 2 6- × - = —
4 5 20
6. What does ¾ × ⅜ equal?
(Repeat steps 1-6 with several more problems.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give Students a worksheet with a mix of multiplication, addition, 
and subtraction problems like the following.)
3 2 □ u 3 4 □
a' 4 + 4 □ ‘ 2 X 2 □
6 1 □ . 6 1 □
° 3 3 □ ’ 3 X 3 □
2. When you multiply fractions, you work top times top and bottom 
times bottom. When you multiply fractions, what do you do?
3. But when you add or subtract fractions, you work only across the 
top. When you add or subtract fractions, what do you do?
STUDENTS
Top times the top and bottom 
times the bottom
6
20
6
20
Top times top and bottom 
times bottom
Work only across the top
continued

356 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.17 (continued)
MULTIPLYING TWO PROPER FRACTIONS
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. What do you do when you add or subtract fractions? Work across the top
What do you do when you multiply fractions?
(Repeat steps 2-4 until firm.)
Top times top and bottom 
times bottom
5. Touch problem a. Read the problem. 3 2— + —4 4
What type of problem is this? Addition
What do you do when you add fractions? Work across the top
Work the problem (Pause.) What's the answer?
(Repeat step 5 with remaining problems.)
5
4
Format 13.18
MULTIPLYING A FRACTION AND
A WHOLE NUMBER (See Video in Part A)
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Converting a Whole Number to a Fraction
1. Listen to this rule: We can change a whole number into a fraction 
by giving it a denominator of 1. How do we change a whole 
number into a fraction? Give it a denominator of 1
2. (Write 3 on board.) What number is this? 3
How do I change it into a fraction? Give it a denominator of 1
Watch me change 3 into a fraction. (Write 1 under 3.)
3
1
3 over 1 is the same as 3. I'll draw a picture to show you that 3∕1 
equals 3.
(Draw the following circles.)
I=OOO
We have three wholes used up.
3. (Write 5 on board.) How do I change 5 into a fraction? Give it a denominator of 1
Yes, 5 over 1 equals 5 wholes. (Write the fraction.) 
5
1
(Repeat step 3 with 2, 9, 4, 8.)

Chapter 13 Fractions 357
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following problem on the board.)
7X8 =---------= J = □4
2. Listen to this rule about multiplying fractions: A fraction can only be 
multiplied by another fraction. Listen again. A fraction can only be 
multiplied by another fraction.
3. Read this problem. T8
(Point to ¾.) Is this fraction multiplied by another fraction? No
So before we can work the problem we have to change 8 into a 
fraction. How do I change 8 into a fraction? Give it a denominator of 1
(Write the problem.)
3 8
4 X 1 ~
4. Now we're ready to multiply across the top and bottom. What is 
3X8? 24
(Write 24.)
What is 4 × 1? 4
(Write 24∕4.)
5. Does 2¾ equal more or less than one whole? More
How do we figure out how many whole groups 2¾ equals? Divide 4 into 24
Four goes into 24 how many times? 6
(Write 6 in box.)
6. What does ¾ × 8 equal? 6
(Repeat steps 1-6 with the problems below.)
2 3 1- × 9 -×10 -×83 5 4
Part C: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students worksheets with problems similar to the following 
problem:)
∣ × 7 =------= J = □
2. Touch problem a. Read it. 1(Point to 2∕3.) Is 2∕3 multiplied by another fraction? No
So what do you have to do? Change 7 into a fraction
Do it. (Monitor responses.)
3. Now multiply the fractions. (Monitor responses.) What fraction did 14
you end up with? 3
continued

358 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 13.18 (continued)
MULTIPLYING A FRACTION AND 
A WHOLE NUMBER
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. Is 1⅝ more or less than one whole group?
How do you figure out how many whole groups?
Divide—remember to write the remainder as a fraction. 
(Monitor Responses.)
5. What does ⅜ × 7 equal?
More
Divide 3 into 14
4∣
(Repeat steps 2-5 with remaining problems.)
