Direct Instruction Mathematics (5th ed.), Stein, Kinder, Silbert & Carnine — Chapter: Pre-algebra

Chapter
18
Pre-algebra
With Don Crawford
LEARNING OUTCOMES
18.1 Identify the recommended sequences for teaching skills in each of the 
following topics: introducing the coordinate system and algebraic functions, 
other types of numbers, expressions and equations, and ratio and proportions.
18.2 Outline two ways in which teachers can integrate conceptual understanding 
activities into instruction on specific instructional strategies.
18.3 Discuss how the strategy in this text for teaching students about the coordinate 
system differs from traditional algebra instruction on the coordinate system and 
how the differences reduce student confusion.
18.4 Discuss how understanding “other numbers,” such as integers, serves as a 
prerequisite for algebraic reasoning.
18.5 Describe how the equality principle taught in earlier grades is related to the 
initial instruction in solving equations.
18.6 Outline how the earlier work on equivalent fractions (Chapter 13) and problem 
solving using tables (Chapter 11) is incorporated into the strategies for solving 
ratio and proportion problems.
18.7 Summarize the diagnosis and remediation procedures for addressing common 
errors in early algebraic reasoning.
Algebra is considered to be a “gatekeeper” subject because it is the first in a series of higher-level 
math courses that prepare students for success in college and the workforce. Consequently, 
pre-algebra instruction has been included in most commercial middle school curricula as a 
means for preparing students for their high school math courses. This chapter on pre-algebra 
addresses four major topics common to middle school courses that are designed to prepare 
students for algebra: (a) the coordinate system and simple algebraic functions; (b) other types 
of numbers such as prime numbers, factors, positive and negative integers, and exponents; 
(c) expressions and equations; and (d) ratios and proportions. Content also commonly found in 
pre-algebra courses includes many of the more complex skills found in the previous chapters on 
fractions, percent and ratios, data analysis, probability, geometry, and problem solving.

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 479
SKILL HIERARCHY
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙
The specific skills for each of the four topics listed above are outlined in the Instructional Sequence 
and Assessment Chart. The number associated with each skill indicates the grade level at which it 
is commonly introduced. All of the pre-algebra skills listed may be taught by sixth grade; however, 
in most commercial programs, pre-algebra skills are taught in seventh or eighth grade.
Note that the skills under each heading are listed in order for that specific topic. The topics 
may be taught in any order and simultaneously, with the exception of other types of numbers 
(OT). Teaching positive and negative integers (found in “other types of numbers”) is a prerequisite for mastering algebraic equations.
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
Coordinate System and Functions (CSF)
5 Plot points on coordinate
system given x and y values 
and reverse
What letter is (x = 7, y = 5)?
Write the coordinates for point A.
5 Students complete a function
table, plot the points found, and 
connect the points in a line
Complete the function table, plot the points, and connect 
them with a straight line.
continued

480 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART (continued)
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
6 Given two pairs of x and y values, 
students determine the function, 
complete the function table, and 
graph the points
Given a line on the coordinate 
system, find the points, complete 
a function table, and find the 
function
Other Types of Numbers (OT)
4
4
5
Prime numbers
Factoring
When the total is positive, combine several subtractions and several additions and find the answer 
(preskill for integers)
Solve problems that involve multiplication with addition and/or 
subtraction (preskill for integers)
Using a number line, combine 
positive and negative integers with 
either negative or positive totals
Absolute value
Name the prime numbers below 12.
Give the prime factors for each of these numbers in this form 
12 = 2 × 2 × 3: 36, 27, 51
Find the answer to:0 + 18 - 12 + 6- 5- 4 + 9 =
a. 4 + 6+1 b. 8-5 + 2
×4 ×6
-I. F l l÷+.H--∣...IH. I...I...I. H+. H4-10-9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
a. -6 + 5 = b. -4 - 2 = c. 8 - 10 =
6 In each pair of numerals, write the one that is farther from zero: 
a. -8, +5 b. +7, -4 c. -2, +9

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 481
7 Combine positive and negative a. +2 b. -3 c. -8
integers without a number line -9 -4 +3
7 Multiply by a positive or negative a. 2 + 4-1 b. 6 c. 9-8 + 4
integer × -3 × -4 × -7
7 Add and subtract positive and 
negative integers
a. -4+-3= b. -7--2 =
8 Name the base and the exponent Name the base and the exponent for each of the following:
from expanded notation examples a. 4 × 4 × 4 =
and the reverse b. M×M×M×M×M=
Write out the expanded notation problem expressed by each of the 
following:
c. 14 d. D3 e. 715
8 Combining exponents Break the group of multiplied values into two groups, the part 
underlined and the rest.
6 × 6 × 6×6×6×6×6
67 =__ X___
Combine these two terms into one:
45 × 43 =__
8 Simplifying exponents Reduce the following terms:
. .3×3×3×3×3×3×3
3 3 × 3 × 3 × 3
. . 7 × 7 × 7
b 7 × 7 × 7 × 7 X 7 × 7 "
Expressions and Equations
6 Write and evaluate expressions a. Find the value of j when 5/ = 25.
with letters for numbers in b. Find the value of e when 24 = e + 10.
one-step problems rc. Find the value of r when — = 9.
6 Write and evaluate expressions a. Find the value of m when 2m + 5 = 17.
with letters for numbers in 4 1
two-step problems b. Find the value of y when -y + 1-=2.
c. Find the value of 7 when 43 = 57 - 7.
Ratio and Proportion (R∕P)
6 Ratio tables The ratio of sand to gravel in a mixture is 4 parts sand to 9 parts 
gravel. If there are 260 pounds in the total mixture, how many 
pounds of sand are there? How many pounds of gravel are there?
7 Ratio tables problems using In a factory, of the employees were women. The rest were men.
fractions for classes 5
There were 890 employees. How many employees were men? How 
many employees were women?
7 Ratio tables problems using Abbey Hill is ~ as high as Howard Hill. Abbey Hill is 240 feet high. How
fractions that compare 8
high is Howard Hill? How much higher is Howard Hill than Abbey Hill?
7 Ratio tables problems using 55% of the bagels are cheese. The rest of the bagels are plain. There
percentages for classes are 9 plain bagels. How many cheese bagels are there? How many 
bagels are there altogether?
7 Ratio tables problems using Train A is 40% longer than train B. If train B is 400 meters long,
percentages that compare how long is train A? How much longer is train A than train B?

482 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING
∙∙∙∙∙∙∙∙
Understanding algebra requires a conceptual understanding of the relationships and functions 
of numbers. We recommend integrating activities that develop conceptual understanding in 
two ways—either as an introduction to a topic or as a proof to show the reasoning behind a 
specific procedure. As with the other topics covered in this text, conceptual understanding may 
be developed using concrete objects (manipulatives), semi-concrete objects (drawings), and/or 
real-world examples. Throughout this chapter, specific examples of exercises related to conceptual understanding are embedded in the discussion of each of the four major topics.
COORDINATE SYSTEM AND FUNCTIONS (CSF)
• ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
The coordinate system and functions can be introduced to students as early as the fourth grade. 
At the beginning levels, students use only positive integers. Building on their knowledge of 
graphs and number lines (see Chapter 16), students learn that an x value is the distance of a point 
to the right of zero. A y value is the distance of a point up from zero. Students begin by finding 
the x value and the y value for given points on a coordinate system. After several lessons on finding values, students plot points on the coordinate system given the values.
Traditional algebra instruction identifies points, or ordered pairs, on the coordinate system as 
(5, 6), requiring students to remember that the first numeral is the x value and the second numeral 
is the y value. However, students learn the coordinate system more easily if they initially receive 
the points written as (x = 5, y = 6). Over time, students will memorize the order of x andy.
Next, students learn to complete a function table such as the following.
The teacher models how to apply the function to determine the y value when the x value is given. 
In the preceding example, the teacher would model substituting 0 for x in the function x + 2 to 
derive y (0 + 2 = 2; y = 2). After completing the table, the students would plot the points on 
the coordinate system and connect the points with a straight line.
After several lessons on completing function tables, students are ready to derive the function when given two pairs of values. Initially, they are asked to choose between two possible 
functions that fit the first pair of values, eliminating the function that does not fit the second pair 
of values. Once students can choose the correct function, students are ready to derive the function given at least two pairs of values. Students are then taught to plot points from the function 
table on the coordinate system and draw a line. Format 18.1: Using and Plotting a Function 
outlines procedures for teaching students how to derive a function, plot the points, and draw a 
line representing the function. Later, the teacher would teach students how to derive the function 
when given points on the coordinate system connected bylines.
Coordinate systems allow for the visual representation of the relationship between two sets 
of data (the function). A function may be thought of as a rule that describes the relationship 
between two sets of numbers and can be used to solve for an unknown quantity. For example, 
the function x + 2 could be used to solve the following real-world problem:
Pearl is 2 years older than Paul. Paul will be 8 when they visit Disneyland again. Pearl 
wants to know how old she will be. Paul is currently 4. Create a function table to determine 
how old Pearl will be when she visits Disneyland again.

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 483
Known Quantity Function Answer
Paul's Age x + 2 Pearl's Age
4 4 + 2 6
5 5 + 2 7
6 6 + 2 8
7 7 + 2 9
8 8 + 2 7
OTHER TYPES OF NUMBERS: PRIMES, FACTORS,
INTEGERS, AND EXPONENTS
«•••••••
Using “other types of numbers” including prime numbers, factors, positive and negative integers, and exponents is a necessary prerequisite for algebraic reasoning using unknown variables. 
For example, finding prime numbers allows students to use an algebraic method and canceling 
to reduce fractions. Many of the skills introduced in this section may be introduced as early as 
fourth grade.
Primes and Factors
As mentioned above, finding prime factors enables students to use the algebraic method of 
reducing fractions and “canceling.” Students learn that canceling is possible because they 
are canceling fractions that equal one and therefore do not change the value of the original 
24fraction. For example, to reduce the fraction —, students find the prime factors of both 24 36
and 36 and then cancel the prime factors that appear in the numerator and the denominator 
(fractions that equal one).
• 24 _2X2X2X3_^X^X2X3_2 
36~2×2X3×3~⅛×2×3X3~ 3
Successfully teaching students to understand prime numbers and factors depends greatly on 
their facility with multiplication facts. Students who are not fluent with their multiplication facts 
cannot readily determine prime numbers or the factors of a nonprime number, nor can they use 
the test recommended in the following paragraph to determine if a number is a prime number.
Students are taught to test for a prime number by asking themselves, “Can this number 
be divided by something other than 1 and itself?” If the number in question can be divided by 
something other than 1 and itself, it is not a prime number. Teachers can have students apply 
this test to a list of numerals. The list should consist of half prime numbers and half nonprime 
numbers.
When adding and subtracting unlike fractions, students learn to find all of the factors of the 
two numerators. (See Chapter 13.) However, in pre-algebra, students are taught to find the prime 
factors of numbers and to represent the number as only prime factors multiplied together. The 
prime factors of 15 are 3 and 5 because both factors are prime numbers and 3 × 5 = 15. 
The prime factors of 12 are 2, 2, and 3; all factors are prime numbers, and 2×2×3 = 12. 
The factors 2 and 6 are not prime factors because even though 2 × 6 = 12, 6 is not a prime 
number. The prime factors of 6 are 2 and 3; therefore, the prime factors of 12 are 2, 2, and 3.
Finding prime factors involves attempting to divide a number by each prime number, in 
order, as many times as possible. To find the prime factors of 35, students first attempt to divide 
35 by 2 and 3 (the first prime numbers). However, neither 2 nor 3 divide into 35 evenly. Next, 
students would divide 35 by 5 (the next prime number). Since 35 divides by 7 evenly, and both 5 
and 7 are prime numbers, they are the prime factors of 35.

484 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
For 36, students can divide by 2 evenly 18 times. Since 18 is not a prime number, students 
must continue the process of dividing until each factor is a prime number. The prime factors for 
36 are 2, 2, 3, and 3 (see division below).
36 ÷ 2 = 18
18 ÷ 2 — 9
9 ÷ 3 = 3
2 × 2 × 3 × 3 = 36
Teachers may instruct students to use a calculator to determine if each of the numerals on the list 
can be divided evenly by prime numbers less than 20 as a modification for students who are not 
fluent with their multiplication facts.
Integers
Integers include both positive and negative numbers. Many students have difficulty working 
with negative numbers. To to assist students’ understanding of the concept of negative numbers, we recommend that teachers use a number line. Although students may be familiar with 
a number line, teachers must be sure that students understand the rule that when adding, you 
move to the right on a number line, and when subtracting, you move to the left. Students 
can use the number line to solve problems with positive and negative integers, for example, 
—6 + 5 = □ or — 1 — 3 — □. Initially, students should be given only addition combinations 
so that they are not confused by the appearance of both operational signs (plus/minus) and 
signed values (positive/negative). Limiting initial examples ensures that only one new concept 
is introduced at a time.
As mentioned in Chapter 16, the concept of absolute value is introduced to students as “the 
distance from zero.” Once students understand the concept of absolute value, teachers can use 
the concept when they teach students to solve problems with positive and negative integers. See 
Format 18.2: Combining Integers for this strategy. The first step of the structured board presentation involves teaching students the following rules:
1. If the signs of the numbers are the same, you add.
2. If the signs of the numbers are different, you subtract.
3. When you subtract, you start with the number that is farther from zero on the number Une 
and subtract the other number.
4. The sign in the answer is always the sign of the number that was farther from zero.
The remaining part of the structured board presentation focuses on the application of these rules. 
Students will need considerable practice in using the rules to solve computation problems with 
positive and negative integers. The less structured board presentation provides abbreviated rules 
to help students master the rules prior to providing worksheet practice.
Next, students are taught to multiply integers. For a problem such as 5 × (7 — 2 — 3), 
students copy the sign of each term and, using the distributive property, multiply the positive integer and each of the values (35 — 10 — 15). After students have mastered such problems, they are taught a rule for multiplying by a negative integer: If you multiply by a negative 
value, you write the opposite of the sign. Using that rule, — 5 × (7 — 2 — 3) would become 
(—35 + 10 + 15). The rule is simple and efficient in that students need to learn only one rule 
rather than the traditional four rules:
positive × positive = positive
negative × positive = negative 
negative × negative = positive 
positive × negative = negative
Next, students can be introduced to conventional notation for combining positive and negative integers in addition and subtraction problems (—8 H---- 3 = □). Initially, to facilitate 
learning this notation, teachers may want to use exaggerated signs representing the operations 
(addition or subtraction). For example, the problem above could be written —8 H—3.

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 485
Next, students are taught to apply two rules. First, they are taught that the big minus sign 
indicates that you combine (add) the first number with the opposite of the second number. So 
—4 — —5 becomes —4 + 5 and —4 — +5 becomes —4 + —5.
The second rule students learn is: The big plus sign means you combine the two terms as 
they are. So —4 H—5 remains —4 H---- 5. After students master the application of the rules with 
exaggerated signs, we recommend that they practice rewriting problems using typical notation 
before solving the problems.
Exponents
Writing and combining exponents are skills commonly needed in complex problems. We suggest initially using expanded notation to assist students in understanding the concept of exponents. Expanded notation illustrates the relationship between repeated multiplication and 
exponents. Teachers provide students with several examples of repeated multiplication, such as 
4×4×4orD×D×jD×Z>, and explain that the number that is repeated is called the base 
number. The exponent is the number of times the base number is repeated and is written as a 
little numeral above the base numeral. Therefore, in 4 × 4 × 4, 4 is the base number, and the 
exponent is 3. This is written as 43.
Teachers need to provide many examples of repeated multiplication in which students 
are asked to identify the base number and the exponent. Students should practice writing base 
numbers and exponents as well. Finally, students should practice writing the expanded notation 
when given a base number and exponent.
Combining exponents can be illustrated by presenting examples of expanded notation 
divided into groups. For example, (6 × 6 × 6) × (6 × 6). The teacher would point out that the 
examples fall into two groups and then use the examples to show that 63 × 62 = 65.
Similarly, expanded notation can be used to show how to simplify exponents. Simplifying 
exponents is just like simplifying prime factors in that the same numbers in the numerator and 
denominator are canceled (because they are fractions equal to 1).
EXPRESSIONS AND EQUATIONS
«•••••••
Typically, students learn to write and evaluate expressions (3b + 4) with a letter representing a 
numerical value early in middle school as a preskill for solving algebraic equations. All of the 
instruction related to algebraic equations in this text is grounded in the equality principle: “We 
must end with the same number on this side and the other side of the equal sign.” That principle 
was initially introduced in Chapter 7 as a preskill for the beginning addition strategy. This chapter 
introduces an extension of that rule: “Whatever you do to one side of an equation you must do to 
the other.” A double-pan balance may be used to promote conceptual understanding of this rule.
For example, a teacher may place 3 one-ounce weights on one pan (side) and demonstrate that 
3 one-ounce weights must be added to the other pan (side) to establish equality between the two 
sides. The teacher could then add 2 additional one-ounce weights to one side to show inequality 
between the two sides. In order to balance the two sides, the teacher would add 2 one-ounce 
weights to the other pan. After the initial demonstration by the teacher, the students may be 
given the opportunity to manipulate the double-pan balance themselves to solve equations. Electronic versions of balance beams also are available for student practice.
Initial instruction for solving equations focuses on finding the value of one unknown 
variable in single-step problems, such as 3 + x — 8. After students have mastered that skill, 

486 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
students are taught to find the value of a variable in problems requiring more than one step 
(4 + 5d = 12). Students who successfully isolate and solve problems involving a single variable are ready to learn to solve problems with multiple variables, combine like terms, and translate word problems into algebraic equations.
Solving for a Single Variable
In Part A of Format 18.3: Solving One-Step Problems with Variables—Addition and 
Subtraction the teacher introduces the students to the rule “Whatever you do to one side of an 
equation, you must do to the other.” The teacher then models how to isolate the variable and 
solve to find the value of that variable. A preskill for isolating a variable is finding the inverse of 
positive and negative integers. A less structured board presentation and independent work follow 
to provide additional practice.
Two example-selection guides are relevant to this format. First, problems should include a 
variety of addition and subtraction equations. Second, the variables in the equations must appear 
on the right and left sides of the equal signs in a random order. Note that the range of examples 
provided in the less structured board presentation includes a variety of addition and subtraction 
problems as well as the appearance of variables on both sides of the equations.
After students have mastered finding the value of a variable in one-step problems involving addition and subtraction and simplifying fractions, Format 18.4: Solving One-Step 
Problems with Variables—Multiplication and Division may be presented. In Part A, Preskill: Finding the Reciprocal, students are taught the procedure for finding the reciprocals of 
fractions and whole numbers. Part B is a structured board presentation in which the teacher 
models solving for a variable in equations involving multiplication or division. Part C is a 
less structured board presentation that provides guided practice. Finally, Part D provides 
independent practice.
Students who have mastered finding the value of a variable in one-step problems using all 
four of the operations are ready to learn to find the value of a variable in two-step problems like 
the following:
16 + 4r = 28
The procedures for finding the value of a variable in two-step problems are similar to the procedures outlined in Formats 18.3 and 18.4. The teacher first would model isolating the term 
with the variable (4r) by adding the inverse of 16 ( —16) to both sides of the equation . Then the 
teacher would model isolating the variable r by multiplying both sides of the equation by the 
reciprocal of 4 . The equation would then be solved to determine the value of r. The teacher
would follow modeling the procedure with guided and independent practice. Note that prior to 
introducing two-step problems, the teacher would need to teach the vocabulary word “term” to 
the students.
Substitutions
Students who have mastered finding the value of a single variable in one- and two-step problems 
can be introduced to equations with more than one variable. Students would be taught that the 
values of the variables in an equation cannot be determined if there is more than one variable. 
The values can be determined, however, if the value of one of the variables is known. The teacher 
would begin by writing a problem like the following on the board:
8p - 3j = 24 7 = 8
The teacher first would model substituting 8 for j in the equation:
8p - 3(8) = 24
Then the teacher would ask the students for the product of 3(8) and update the equation again.
8p - 24 = 24

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 487
Because only one variable remains, the students are able to isolate the term 8p and solve to 
determine the value of p. After modeling a few examples, the teacher would provide guided and 
independent practice to the students including a variety of problems.
Like Terms
After teaching students to work with multiple variables, the teacher would build on the students’ 
knowledge of combining integers to teach combining like terms to solve more complex problems. The teacher would introduce the concept by presenting an example and explaining that 
the terms can be combined when they all have the same variable. For example, 2^ + 5^- 3# 
can be combined as 4^ because 2 + 5-3 = 4. The teacher would provide additional practice 
examples until the students demonstrate mastery of combining terms when all of the variables 
are the same. Then the teacher would introduce combining terms when more than one variable is 
present (4r + 2/ — 3/ + 5r), stressing the importance of only combining terms with like variables (9r - 1∕).
Word Problems
Chapter 11 describes instructional procedures for teaching several types of word problems 
including classification and comparison problems. Once students understand how to solve basic 
algebraic equations, they can translate word problems into algebraic equations using variables 
and apply their algebraic knowledge to solving these problems.
Table 18.1 illustrates the similarities and differences in solving word problems using the 
fact family strategy introduced in Chapter 11 and algebraic strategies introduced previously in 
this chapter. If students have learned how to solve problems by applying the fact family rules 
for finding missing values, then the transition to using algebraic strategies is fairly straightforward. Table 18.1 illustrates the application of both strategies for comparison and classification 
problems.
The examples provided in Table 18.1 represent the simplest types of word problems 
that can be solved using algebraic strategies. Algebraic strategies are applicable to more 
complex problems as well. Word problems become more complex when they include 
more abstract variations in wording and/or more complex calculations that require knowledge of fractions, decimals, and percent, for example. Teachers need to be aware of how 
these variations in wording and how more complex calculations may cause difficulties for 
students. Table 18.2 illustrates how simple word problems become more complex with both 
wording changes and more difficult calculation demands. The next section on ratios and 
proportions also provides teachers instructional strategies to help students solve complex 
word problems.
RATIOS AND PROPORTIONS (R∕P)
«•••••••
Successfully solving ratio problems first requires that students set up the problem accurately. We 
recommend teaching students to write the labels in the problem as numerators and denominators 
on both sides of the equal sign. In the problem below, students write the labels “TVs” as the 
numerator and “Radios” as the denominator. The students then repeat the fraction of TVs over 
Radios on the other side of the equal sign.
The store has 3 TVs for every 7 radios. If there are 28 radios in the store, how many TVs 
are there?
TVs TVs
Radios Radios
The labels provide a prompt for students to successfully identify the numerals that are associated 
with TVs and those that are associated with Radios.
3 TVs DTVs
7 Radios 28 Radios

488 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
TABLE 18-1 Solving Simple Word Problems Using the Fact Family Strategy
Word Problem Example
Fact Family Strategy—Using
Fact Family Rules Algebraic Strategy
Comparison Joaquin saved $92 from 
his after-school job. His 
twin brother Julio saved 
$79. How much more did 
Joaquin save?
SET-UP
JU Difference
79 □ JO
--------------------- ► 92
SET-UP
79 + D - 92
STRATEGY STRATEGY
Fact family rule: When the big 
number is given, subtract to find the 
other small number. The big number, 
92, is given; therefore, you need to 
subtract.
Isolate the variable by adding the 
inverse to both sides. To isolate D, 
add the inverse, -79, to both 
sides.
SOLUTION SOLUTION
92 — 79 = ∣13I 79 + D = 92
-/79 ξ√9
D= 13
Classification There are 17 girls in the 
chemistry class, which has 
24 students. How many of 
the students are boys?
SET-UP
G Difference
17 □ b
SET-UP
17 + D = 24
⅛, n∕∣
STRATEGY STRATEGY
Fact family rule: When the big number is given, subtract to find the 
other small number. The big number, 
24, is given; therefore, you need to 
subtract.
Isolate the variable by adding the 
inverse to both sides. To isolate 
Dl add the inverse, -17, to both 
sides.
SOLUTION SOLUTION
24-17 =∣T∣ 17 + D = 24
-47 →7
7
TABLE 18.2 Instructional Recommendations for Solving Complex Word Problems
Simple Word Problem
Complex Word Problem—Variation 
in Wording Instructional Recommendation
The school is 30 miles 
farther than the park.
If it is 60 miles to the park, 
how far is it to the school?
5 = 30 + p
It is 30 miles farther to the school 
than to the park. If it is 60 miles to 
the park, how far is it to the school? 
Determining the equation is more 
difficult because the wording does 
not directly translate to the equation. 
Possible error: 30 + s = p
Prior to introducing word problems with more 
complex wording, model translating the complex 
wording into simple sentences that translate 
directly to the equation and have students practice 
with similar translations before solving problems. 
"It is 30 miles farther to the school than the 
park" translates to "The school is 30 miles farther 
than the park."
The school is three times 
as far as the park. The 
distance to the school is 
25 miles. How far is the 
park?
1The school is - as far as the park.
The distance to the school is 25 miles.
How far is it to the park?
This problem is more difficult in that it 
requires knowledge of fractions.
Teachers must identify the calculation preskills 
required to solve the problems they encounter 
(fractions, percent, decimals).

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 489
Once the numerals are written alongside their appropriate labels, the problem can be solved 
using equivalent fractions. The next step in solving the problem involves identifying the fraction 
∕4λ . . . . ∕12λequal to one I — I that will yield the equivalent fraction I — I and the answer to the question: If 
there are 28 radios in the store, how many TVs are there? 12.
3 TVs
7 Radios
12 TVs
28 Radios
Using Ratio Tables to Solve Classification Problems
Ratio tables are especially useful for solving word problems in that they allow students to see the 
relationships among the values in a problem. Following is an example of how to use a ratio table 
to solve a classification word problem.
A factory makes SUVs and cars. It makes 5 SUVs for every 3 cars made. If the factory 
made 1600 vehicles last year, how many cars and how many SUVs did it make?
ClassificationRatio
Cars 3 600
SUVs 5 1,000
Vehicles 8 1,600
The bold information in the table is provided to the students in the text of the problem. Students 
are to figure out the missing numbers in order to answer the question. Students can apply their 
previous knowledge of classification word problems to solving ratio problems using tables. (See 
Chapter 11 for a discussion of classification word problems and table problems.) Since students 
have already been introduced to classification word problems, they are familiar with the fact that 
“Cars” and “SUVs” are the subclasses and that “Vehicles” is the superordinate class. They know 
that if the two small numbers are given (cars and SUVs), they must add to find the big number 
(3 + 5 = 8 vehicles).
Once completed, the numerals in the ratio column can be used to state the ratio between 
any two rows. It is already stated that the ratio of cars to SUVs was 3 to 5. After determining 
the number of vehicles, the ratio table shows that the ratio of SUVs to vehicles made is 5 to 8 
and the ratio of cars to vehicles made is 3 to 8. This information enables the students to set up a 
simple ratio to find the missing information that is requested in the question. The setup to find 
the number of cars made looks like this:
3 Cars ( ) _ □ Cars
8 Vehicles ( ) 1,600 Vehicles
3 Cars 200 600------------- ×  —  8 Vehicles 200-----1,600
A similar setup can be used to determine the number of SUVs made.
Because students are familiar with classification problems, they also know that if the superordinate class were known, they could find the other subclass by subtracting. For example, if a 
similar problem indicated that the ratio of SUVs to vehicles was 4 to 10, students could subtract 
4 SUVs from 10 vehicles to determine the value for the other subclass, 6 cars. Setting up a ratio 
problem between the quantity given and the quantity requested in the problem will become routine for students with practice.
Using Ratio Tables with Fractions
Once students have mastered using simple ratio tables, teachers can introduce more sophisticated ratio tables that include fractions representing classes. Teachers first introduce problems

490 Part HI Extended Concepts and Skills
SUMMARY BOX 18.1
Rationale for Using Numerators of Fractions in Ratio Equations
1. When working with ratios, it's useful to use whole numbers 
instead of fractions in the ratio.
Understanding why the shortcut of using only the numerators 
works requires demonstrating how to convert the fractions in 
both the numerator and the denominator into whole numbers.
Shorter = ~
^ιι-l
2. Converting the numerator J for "Shorter" into a whole 
∕5∖ 15
number requires multiplying by 5 I γ I to get — or 3. 5 was 
chosen because it is the denominator in the fraction that 
represents "All."
3. Because we need to multiply both the numerator and the 
denominator by the same fraction, we need to multiply — 
by — as well.
Multiplying the fraction by a fraction equal to one creates an 
equivalent fraction.
4. Students reduce the fractions in both the numerator and 
denominator to obtain whole numbers.
---35∖1∕ 5
5∖1∕ 5
15
5 _ 3 _ Shorter
25 “ 5 ~ ~^A∣Γ~
5
5. The result is whole numbers for the ratio of shorter children to 
all children. The whole numbers in the ratio are the numerators 
of each of the fractions in the original problem.
Shorter = 3
All = 5
SUMMARY BOX 18.2
Ratio Tables Using Fractions for Classes
1. Students read the problem and figure 
out the fraction number family.
Two-thirds of the people at the coffee shop 
are drinking coffee. The rest are drinking 
tea. If 15 people are drinking tea, how many 
people are drinking coffee? How many people 
are in the coffee shop?
Fraction 
family Ratio Quantity
Coffee
Tea
People
2. Students complete the fraction 
family column.
Fraction 
family Ratio Quantity
Coffee 2
3
Tea 2 
3
People 3
3

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 491
3. Students use numerator of fraction to 
complete ratio column.
Fraction 
family Ratio Quantity
Coffee 2
3 2
Tea 2
3 1
People 3
3 3
4. Students fill in known quantities.
2 Coffee = Q Coffee
1 Tea 15 Tea
Fraction 
family Ratio Quantity
Coffee 2
3 2
Tea 1^
3
1 15
People 3
3 3
5. Students write ratio equation.
6. Students solve ratio problem to answer 
question about coffee drinkers.
Fraction 
family Ratio Quantity
Coffee 2
3
2 30
Tea 1
3 1 15
People 3
3 3
7. Students use the number-family strategy 
to determine how many people are in the 
shop and complete the table.
Fraction 
family Ratio Quantity
Coffee 2
3 2 30
Tea 2
3 1 15
People 3
3 3 45
in which one class is a fraction: For example, — of the plants were trees. Since students know 
3 3 2
that all of the plants are represented as —, they can easily determine that - of the plants are not 
trees. The superordinate class is always a fraction equal to one, and the two subclasses combine 
to equal one. Given a set of classifications represented as fractions, students can create a ratio 
table using the numerators of the fractions as the ratio. The problem below illustrates this type of 
problem along with a completed ratio table.
Three-fifths of the children in the school are shorter than the principal. If 128 children 
are taller than the principal, how many are shorter? How many children are there in the 
school?

492 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
ClassificationFraction Family Ratio Answer
Shorter 3
5 3 192
Taller 2
5
2 128
All 5
5
5 320
Students have been taught that if — of the children are shorter, then the fraction that represents
. 5 2all the children is —. They subtract to find out that — of the children are taller. The numeraFormat 18.58: Ratio 
Tables Using
Fractions for Classes
Watch how Kristen leads her students through setting up a ratio 
table using fractions.
tors express the ratio of each of those terms. In Part B of Format 18.5: Ratio Tables Using 
Fractions for Classes students are taught to put the numerators of the fraction family into the 
ratio column. To promote conceptual understanding, the teacher may choose to demonstrate 
to students why the numerators only can express the ratio. This explanation can be found in 
Summary Box 18.1.
The numerators express the ratio of each of those classes, so that the ratio of shorter children to all the children is 3 to 5, and the ratio of the taller children to all children is 2 to 5. Once 
the ratios are determined, the students can find the unknown quantities by constructing a ratio 
between the known quantity (128 children who are taller) and the unknown quantity (“How 
many children are shorter?”). This is solved in the same manner as other ratio equations.
Taller 2 ( ) 128
-------- × Z ~ ----Shorter 3 ( ) □
Taller 2 64 128-------- × — = --Shorter 3 64 192
See Summary Box 18.2 for an illustration of the recommended steps in solving a ratio 
problem using fractions.
Using Ratio Tables to Solve Comparison Problems
Ratio tables also can be used to solve comparison problems. These problems contain a sentence 
that indicates the basis for the comparison. For example:
Louise was paid — of what her boss was paid. If Louise is paid $1,800 a month, how much 6
more does her boss get paid, and what does her boss get paid?
5Louise was paid — of what her boss was paid. Louise is being compared to her boss. Therefore, 6
6her boss is equal to one whole, —. To determine the difference, students are taught to generate the 6
equation below. Note that teachers may want to call attention to the use of the word “difference” 
in labeling the parts of the family.
Difference
£
6
Louise
5
6
Boss
6
6
Once the number family is completed, students can put the numerators into a ratio table. 
Given any of the three values (Louise’s pay, the difference, or her boss’s pay), the students can 
construct ratio equations to determine the other two values. Here is a completed ratio table for 
the problem in which Louise is paid $1,800 a month. The solution to the word problem is that 
her boss was paid $2,160.

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 493
Comparison Ratio Pay
Difference 7 360
Louise 5 1,800
Boss 6 2,160
Using Ratio Tables with Percent Problems
Another type of ratio table students may be introduced to is a classification ratio table using percentages. Students are given one class as a percentage of the whole and the second class as the 
rest. For example:
A store got 40% of its oranges from California. The store got the rest of its oranges from 
Florida. If the store had 170 total oranges, how many were from California and how many 
from Florida?
In the problem above, students learn that the superordinate class (all of the oranges) is always 
equal to 100%. Since the big number is known (100%), this is a subtraction problem. The percentage that came from Florida is determined by subtracting (100% — 40% = 60%). Below is 
the completed number family that represents this problem.
California Florida All
40% + 60% = 100%
Students then put the information from the number family into a ratio table. Given the 
quantity of any of the three variables (total oranges, oranges from California, oranges from 
Florida), students can solve for the other two quantities. A completed ratio table for this problem appears below.
California 40% 68
Florida 60% 102
All 100% 170
The ratio equation to figure out the number of California oranges is
California 4 × ()_ □
All 10 × () 170
California 4 × 17 _ 68
All 10 X 17 “ 170
Finally, students can learn to solve comparison problems using percentages. These are perhaps the most counterintuitive and difficult type of word problems. Determining the appropriate 
number sentence is critical to solving this type of problem. Students must understand that one 
of the variables that is being compared will be the variable equal to 100%. For example, in the 
problem below, students must compare the number of women’s bicycles sold to the number of 
men’s bicycles sold. The problem indicates that fewer women’s bicycles are sold compared to 
the number of men’s bicycles sold; therefore, the number of men’s bicycles sold is the variable 
equal to 100% in this problem.
A bike store sold 25% fewer women’s bicycles than men’s bicycles. (Hint: Women's bicycles are being compared to men's, so which variable is equal to 100%?) If the store sold 
175 fewer women’s bicycles, how many men’s and women’s bicycles did it sell?
Difference Women’s Bicycles Men’s Bicycles
25% + 75% = 100%

494 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Difference 25% 175
Women's 75% 525
Men's W0% 700
Difference 25 × ( ) 175
Men’s 100 × ( ) □
Difference 25 × (7) _ 175
Men’s 100 × (7) ~ 700
Difference 25 × ( ) _175
Women’s 75 X ( ) □
Difference 25 × (7) _ 175
Women’s 75 × (7) ~ 525
Students use the information given in the word problem to complete the ratio table and generate 
equations like the ones above to solve for the unknown values. Using that information, students 
can generate the answers to the questions in the problem. (The shop sold 700 men’s bicycles and 
525 women’s bicycles.)
DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION
Common errors related to pre-algebra skills outlined in this chapter fall into the basic error categories that have been used throughout this text: fact errors (missing a math fact), component-skill 
errors (calculation or confusion errors), and strategy errors. The diagnosis and remediation procedures for the skills and concepts taught in all of the algebraic reasoning sections in this chapter 
should begin with determining the cause of the error. Each of the pre-algebra sections includes a 
discussion of critical discriminations and concepts students must master prior to the introduction 
of the pre-algebra strategy. Those discussions were included to highlight common misunderstandings that could cause student errors. As always, teachers need to confirm their diagnosis 
by analyzing the error and interviewing the student, if necessary. Once the diagnosis has been 
confirmed, the remediation usually involves reviewing critical parts of the relevant formats and 
providing students with additional practice.
Examples of common errors for each of the pre-algebra sections discussed in this chapter 
are outlined in Figure 18.1 along with suggested remediation procedures.
FIGURE 18.1 Pre-algebra diagnosis and remediation
Error Pattern
Plot the point for the coordinates (6, 2).
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Diagnosis
Students confuse the 
x and y axes when 
plotting two coordinates on a graph.
Remediation 
Procedures
The teacher would 
reintroduce the 
coordinate system 
to students using 
points written as 
(x = 6, y = 2). Once 
students have mastered finding and 
plotting coordinates 
using equations, the 
shortcut (6, 2) can be 
introduced.
Remediation 
Examples
Provide worksheet 
practice on plotting coordinates on 
a graph using the 
equations. One students have mastered 
that skill, introduce 
the shortcut during 
a guided practice 
exercise.

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 495
Error Pattern
Find the function for this table:
X Function
Answer 
y
1 2
2 4
but not for all pairs.
Diagnosis
Remediation 
Procedures
Remediation
Examples
Student does not 
test the function 
with both pairs of 
values.
Present the structured worksheet from 
Format 18.1. Focus 
on the procedure for 
determining if the 
proposed function 
rule will work with all 
pairs of values.
Provide examples 
similar to the one 
on which the student made the error. 
Include examples in 
which more than one 
function rule may 
work for the first pair
Student answer: Function isx + 1.
-16
-15
31
Student uses the 
wrong sign in the 
answer.
Solve for x:
3x + 23 = 41
Student's work
3x + 23 = 41
-23 -23
3x = 23
x = 7.7
This is a calculation 
error. The student 
incorrectly subtracted 23 from 41 
on the right side of 
the equation.
Show the solution process to the following comparison problem with percentages 
using the ratio table shown.
Deshawn is 10% taller than his little 
brother. If Deshawn is 5 inches taller than 
his little brother, how tall is Deshawn, and 
how tall is his brother? (Hint: The little 
brother is being compared to Deshawn, so 
who is equal to one or 100%?) 
Student's work:
The student didn't 
set up the ratio table 
correctly. Deshawn is 
100%.
Reteach the less structured board presentation of the format for 
combining integers 
focusing on the fourth 
rule.
Assess the student's 
work to determine if 
subtraction errors are 
cause by regrouping 
errors.
If so, reteach using the 
structured worksheet 
part of Format 8.3: 
Subtraction with 
Renaming.
This is a strategy error. 
The teacher would 
model setting up the 
ratio table with several word problems. 
This can be followed 
with a structured 
worksheet like the 
one found in 
Format 18.5.
-13 -9
-8 +20
-5 -7
+7 -8
Problems that do 
and do not require 
renaming
53
-26
42
-30
% Inches
Deshawn 90
Brother 100
Difference 10 5
The Lakers scored 
10% fewer points 
than the Bulls. 
(Hint: Lakers are 
being compared to 
the Bulls, so who is 
100%?) If the Lakers scored 12 fewer 
points than the Bulls, 
how many points did 
the Lakers and the 
Bulls score?
W × (.5) 5
90 (.5) '
90 × .5 = 45 inches for Deshawn. 
His brother is 5 inches shorter or 
45 - 5 = 40 inches.

496 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED j
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. Describe how a teacher might sequence the skills listed in the four topics in this chapter.
2. How can teachers promote conceptual understanding for solving one-variable algebraic equations?
3. Describe the procedure for teaching students to complete the following function table.
X Function
Answer 
y
0 0
1 4
2 8
3
4
5
4. Construct a set of problems for use in Format 18.2 for combining integers.
5. Construct a set of examples and nonexamples for students to use in determining if a number is a 
prime number.
6. Write a classification problem with fractions to be solved with a ratio table and show the solution.
7. Show the solution process to the following comparison problem with percentages using the ratio 
table shown.
Sondra’s new phone costs 20% more than Ruth’s new phone. If Sondra’s phone costs 
$200.00 more than Ruth’s phone, how much is Sondra’s phone, and how much is Ruth’s? 
(Hint: Sondra is being compared to Ruth, so who is equal to one or 100%?)
Difference 20% $200.00
Sondra's phone
Ruth's phone
8. Outline the steps for remediation in teaching students to solve the following problem: 
4t = 16
t = 12

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 497
Format 18.1
USING AND PLOTTING A FUNCTION
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
Function
4
3
0
5
Answer
y
2
8
1. You have made points on the coordinate system by using a table that shows 
the x values and the y values. When you connect the points, you get a 
straight line. The reason you get a straight line is that all of the points follow 
the same function rule. If you're following the same rule about adding, 
subtracting, multiplying, or dividing the x value to get the y value, you will 
get a straight line on the coordinate system. Let's find the function for this 
table, complete the table, plot the values, and see if we get a straight line.
The first x value is 1. What is the y value?
2. What would it take to get from 1 to 2? What would you add?
3. Let's see if adding 1 will solve everything in this table. What is the second 
x value?
What is the y value?
Can you add 1 to the x value of 4 to get the y value?
If adding didn't work, let's try multiplication. 4 × what number = 8?
Go back and check the first values. The x value is 1. Can you multiply it by 2 
to get the y value of 2?
4. So how do we know that the function is x × 2?
5. So we fill in the function part of this table as x × 2. What is the third x value?
So what is 3 × 2?
And where do we write that 6?
6. What is the fourth x value?
So what is 0 × 2?
So what is the fourth y value?
2
Add 1
4
8
No
2
Yes
Because the first × 
value of 1 X 2 = the 
first y value of 2 and 
the second x value of 
4 × 2 = the second y 
value of 8
3
6
As they value
0
0
0
continued

498 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.1 (continued)
USING AND PLOTTING A FUNCTION
TEACHER
7. Figure out the fifth y value and fill it in. What did you fill in for the fifth y 
value?
8. Now we need to plot these points. The first two points are already plotted. 
What is the × value for the third point?
So the × value moves to the right how many spaces?
The y value moves up how many spaces?
Now plot that point and the two other points.
9. Connect those dots with a ruler. Raise your hand if you got a straight line.
Part B: Structured Worksheet 
Function
STUDENTS
10
3
3 spaces
6 spaces
x
7
4
3 
0
5
Answer
y
4
7
1. Let's find the function for this table, complete the table, plot the values, and 
see if we get a straight line.
The first × value is 1. What is the y value?
2. What would you add to get from 1 to 4?
3. Look at the second pair of values. Can you add 3 to the second × value and 
get the y value?
What is the number sentence for those values?
4. So what is the function?
5. Find the rest of the values. Raise your hand when you're done.
What is the fourth pair of values?
What is the fifth pair of values?
6. Plot those values then connect those dots with a ruler. Raise your hand if 
you got a straight line.
7. (Do steps 1-7 using different functions.)
4
3
Yes
4 + 3 = 7
x + 3
x = 0, y = 3
x = 5, y = 8

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 499
Format 18.2
COMBINING INTEGERS
TEACHER
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. You've worked with positive and negative numbers on the number 
line. Here are some rules you can use to solve problems without using a 
number line (Write the following on a board or on a poster.)
1. If the signs of the numbers are the same, you add.
2. If the signs of the numbers are different, you subtract.
3. When you subtract, you start with the number that is farther from 
zero on the number line and subtract the other number.
4. The sign in the answer is always the sign of the number that is farther 
from zero.
2. (Write this problem on the board.)
-9
+20
3. Are the signs the same or different?
4. If the signs are different, do we add or subtract?
5. We start with the number that is farther from zero. Which number is 
farther from zero, 9 or 20?
6. Start with 20 and subtract 9. What is the answer?
7. The last rule tells us how to determine the correct sign. Read the rule.
8. So is the answer positive 11 or negative 11?
How do you know?
9. (Write this problem on the board.)
-7
-9
10. Are the signs the same or different?
11. Do we add or subtract?
12. Add 7 and 9. What is the answer?
13. The last rule tells us how to determine the correct sign. Read the rule.
14. So is the answer positive 16 or negative 16?
15. How do you know?
STUDENTS
Different
Subtract
20
11
The sign in the answer 
is always the sign of the 
number that is farther 
from zero.
Positive 11
Because 20 is the number 
farther from zero and it 
is positive
The same
Add
16
The sign in the answer is 
always the number that 
is farther sign of the from 
zero.
Negative 16
Because 9 is the number 
farther from zero and it 
is negative
continued

500 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.2 (continued)
COMBINING INTEGERS
TEACHER STUDENTS
16. (Write this problem on the board.)
12
—7
17. Are the signs the same or different? Different
18. If the signs are different, do we add or subtract? Subtract
19. We start with the number that is farther from zero. Which number is 
farther from zero, 12 or 7? 12
20. Start with 12 and subtract 7. What's the answer? 5
21. The last rule tells us what? The sign in the answer
22. So is the answer positive 5 or negative 5?
is always the sign of the 
number that is farther 
from zero.
Positive 5
23. How do you know? Because 12 is the number
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following abbreviations for the four rules.)
Same: Add
Different: Subtract
Start with number farther from zero
Use sign of number farther from zero
2. Here is a short reminder of the four rules for combining positive and
farther from zero and it 
is positive
If the signs of the same,
negative numbers. Who can tell me the first rule? you add.
3. Who can tell me the second rule? If the signs of the
4. Who can tell me the third rule?
numbers shown are 
different, you subtract.
When you subtract, you
5. And who can tell me the last rule?
start with the number 
that is farther from 
zero on the number line 
and subtract the other 
number.
The sign in the answer
6. (Write this problem on the board.)
-5
+7
is always the sign of the 
number that is farther 
from zero.

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 501
TEACHER STUDENTS
7. Let's just talk about what we are going to do. Do we add or subtract? Subtract
8. How do you know? Because the signs are 
different
9. What number do we start with? 7
10. How do you know? Because it is farther from 
zero
11. Will the answer be positive or negative? Positive
12. How do you know? Because the 7 is positive
13. Do the problem now. (Pause.) What's the answer? 2
14. (Write this problem on the board.)
-3
-9
15. Do we add or subtract? Add
16. How do you know? Because the signs are the 
same
17. Will the answer be positive or negative? Negative
18. How do you know? Because the 9 is negative
19. Work the problem. (Pause.) What's the answer. Negative 12
20. (Write this problem on the board.)
-13
+7
21. Do we add or subtract? Subtract
22. How do you know? Because the signs are 
different
23. What number do we start with? 13
24. How do you know? Because it is farther from 
zero
25. Will the answer be positive or negative? Negative
26. How do you know? Because the 13 is 
negative
27. Work the problem. What's the answer? Negative 6
Part C: Structured Worksheet
1. (Students have worksheets with problems such as these.)
a. -7 b. +4 c. +9 d. -3
-8 -2 -13 +6
2. Before you do these problems, let's review the rules. What do you do if Add
the signs are the same?
3. And if you add, what sign will the answer be? The sign of the number 
farther from zero
continued

502 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.2 (continued)
COMBINING INTEGERS
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. When do we subtract?
5. When we subtract, which number do we start with?
6. What sign will the answer be?
7. Work the problems.
When the signs of the 
numbers are different
With the number that is 
farther from zero
The sign of the number 
that is farther from zero
Format 18.3
SOLVING ONE-STEP PROBLEMS WITH VARIABLES—ADDITION
AND SUBTRACTION
TEACHER
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following equation on the board.)
p - 4 = 6
2. You're going to learn how to find the value of a letter in an equation. First, 
you need to know that everything to the left of the equal sign is called the 
"left side." (Point to the left side of the equation.) What is everything to the 
left of the equal sign called?
Everything to the right of the equal sign is called the "right side." (Point to 
the right side of the equation.) What is everything to the right of the equal 
sign called?
3. We want to find the value for the letter p in this equation. To do that, we 
need to get p all by itself on one side of the equation. We're going to get 
p all by itself by adding the inverse of negative 4. What is the inverse of 
negative 4?
Negative 4 plus 4 equals 0, leaving p all by itself. (Add to the equation so it 
looks like the following:)
p - 4 = 6
+ 4
4. Here's an important rule about changing an equation: Whatever you do to 
one side of an equation, you must do to the other. Say the rule.
4
We added 4 to the left side of the equation. That means we also must add 4 
to the right side of the equation. What do we need to do to the right side of 
the equation?
STUDENTS
The left side
The right side
Whatever you do 
to one side of an 
equation, you must do 
to the other.
Add 4

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 503
continued
TEACHER STUDENTS
Yes, we added 4 to the left side of the equation, so we also need to add 4 
to the right side of the equation. (Add to the equation so it looks like the 
following:)
p - 4 = 6 + 4
+ 4
5. Now that we have added 4 to both sides of the equation, we can work the
equation. What is -4 plus 4?
Yes, so we can cross out -4 and +4 on the left side of the equation. (Add to 
the equation so it looks like the following:)
p— A = 6 + 4
Zero
6. Now we work the right side of the equation. What is 6 + 4?
Right! Now our equation looks like this: (Write the following next to the 
original equation on the board.)
p = 10
7. We changed both sides of the equation to find out that p = 10. What does p
Ten
equal?
8. We can check our work by rewriting the equation with 10 in the place of p. 
(Write the following on the board.)
10-4 = 6
10
Does 10 - 4 = 6?
Yes, it does. So we know that p = 10 because 10-4 = 6.
9. (Repeat steps 1-8 with additional examples.)
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write problems like the following on the board. Give students paper and 
pencils for solving the equations.)
a. r + 2 = 18
b. 23 + a = 30
c. 15 = e - 5
d. 12 - p = 7
e. 45 = u + 25
Yes
2. Read problem a.
We want to find the value for r. To do that, you need to get r by itself by
r + 2 = 18
adding the inverse. What do you need to do to get r by itself? Add the inverse
What's the inverse of 2?
Do that. Add - 2 to the side of the equation with r. (Monitor students' work.)
3. Now that you have added -2 to the left side of the equation, what must you
-2
do to the right side of the equation?
Yes, whatever you do to one side of an equation you must do to another.
Add -2 to the right side of the equation. (Monitor students' work.)
Add -2

504 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.3 (continued)
SOLVING ONE-STEP PROBLEMS WITH VARIABLES—ADDITION
AND SUBTRACTION
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. Now you can finish working the equation to find the value of r. Do that now. 
(Monitor students as they solve for r.)
5. What does r equal? r equals 16
6. You can check your work by rewriting the equation with 16 in the place of r. 
Do that now. (Monitor students.)
You put 16 in the place of r. Read the new equation. 16 + 2 = 18
Does that make sense? Yes
Yes, it does. So your answer is correct.
7. (Repeat steps 2-6 with the remaining problems. Instruct the students to follow 
the same steps to find the value of the letter regardless of which side the 
letter is on.)
Part C: Independent Practice
1. (Write problems like the following on the board. Give students paper and 
pencils for solving the equations.)
a. m + 17 = 20
b. 50 - d = 25
c. 80 = 90 - z
d. 13 = j + 5
e. 9 + k = 9
2. Find the value of the variable in each of the equations. Remember to check 
your work by rewriting the equation with the value of the variable. (Monitor 
students as they work.)
Format 18.4
SOLVING ONE-STEP PROBLEMS WITH
VARIABLES—MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill: Finding the Reciprocal
1. You've learned how to find the value of a variable in addition and 
subtraction problems. Now you're going to learn how to find the value of 
a variable in multiplication and division problems. To do that, you need to 
know how to find the reciprocal of a number. The reciprocal of any number 
is the number you multiply by to equal one.
2. The reciprocal of a whole number is 1 over that number. Let's say I wanted to 
find the reciprocal of 15. (Write 15 on the board.) To find the reciprocal of 15, 
I write a fraction with 1 as the numerator and 15 as the denominator. (Write
1 1— on the board.) The reciprocal of 15 is ■ . What is the reciprocal of 15? 1
15

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 505
TEACHER STUDENTS
13. Let's see if that works. (Write 15 x — — .) We need to convert the whole15
15 1number to a fraction. (Write — × — = .) We multiply across when
multiplying fractions. (Point to the numerators.) What is 15 × 1? 15
15 1(Write 15 in the place for the numerator after — × — = . Point to the
denominators.) What is 1 × 15? 15
15 1 15 1(Write 15 in the place for the denominator after
, 15 4 . . 15equals —. What does — equal? One
(Repeat steps 2 and 3 with 3, 4, 29, and 100.)
44. To get the reciprocal of a fraction, turn the fraction upside down. (Write — on
4the board.) I need to find the reciprocal of —. I'm going to turn the fraction
4 5upside down to get the reciprocal of -. (Write — on the board.) The reciprocal 5
4
4 5 4of — is —. What is the reciprocal of ~?
4 55. Let's see if that works. (Write — × - = . Point to the numerators.) What is
4X5? 20
(Write 20 in the place for the numerator. Point to the denominators.) What is
5X4? 20
4 5 20 20(Write 20 in the place for the denominator.) — × — = —. What does -θ equal? One
2 7 1 7(Repeat steps 4 and 5 with -, -, -, and -.) 3 5 2 o
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write the following equation on the board.)
5e = 15
2. We want to find the value for the variable e in this equation. To do that, we
need to get e all by itself on one side of the equation. We're going to get e
all by itself by multiplying by the reciprocal of 5, so that we end up with 1e. 2
What is the reciprocal of 5? 5
15 multiplied by - equals 1, leaving 1e or e. (Add to the equation so it looks
like the following:)
G>θ=15
continued

506 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.4 (continued)
SOLVING ONE-STEP PROBLEMS WITH
VARIABLES—MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION
TEACHER STUDENTS
3. Remember the rule about changing an equation: Whatever you do to one 
side of an equation, you must do to the other. Say the rule.
Whatever you do 
to one side of an 
equation, you must do 
to the other.
1We multiplied the left side of the equation by —. That means we must
1multiply the right side of the equation by -. What do we need to do to the 
right side of the equation?
1Yes, we multiplied the left side of the equation by -, so we need to multiply
1the right side of the equation by -. (Add to the equation so it looks like the 
following:)
5e = 15
14. Now that we have multiplied both sides of the equation by —, we can work
1the equation. What is - multiplied by 5?
1Yes, so we can cross out — and 5 on the left side of the equation. (Add to the 
equation so it looks like the following:)
15
1 Multiply by I
5
2
5
5
1
15. Now we work the right side of the equation. What is 15 times -? (Pause
while students work.)
Right! Now our equation looks like this: (Write the following next to the 
original equation on the board.)
e = 3
6. We changed both sides of the equation to find out that e = 3. What does e 
equal?
3
3
7. We can check our work by rewriting the equation with 3 in the place of e. 
(Write the following on the board.)
5(3) = 15
Does 5 × 3 = 15?
Yes, it does. So we know that e = 3 because 5 × 3 = 15.
8. Let's try another one. (Write the following equation on the board.)
Yes

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 507
continued
TEACHER STUDENTS
9. We want to find the value for the variable b in this equation. To do that, we 
need to get b all by itself on one side of the equation. You need to know 
that — is the same as ( — )b. (Erase — and write ( — }b in its place.) We're
1going to get b all by itself by multiplying by the reciprocal of -, so that we
1end up with ↑b. What is the reciprocal of —? 2
1
1 2multiplied by — equals 1, leaving 1b or b. (Add to the equation so it looks
like the following:)
∕2V1C n— — ]b = 9∖1Λ2∕
10. Remember the rule about changing an equation: Whatever you do to one 
side of an equation, you must do to the other. We multiplied the left side of
2the equation by -. What must we do to the right side of the equation? Multiply by ∣
2Yes, we multiplied the left side of the equation by -, so we need to multiply
2the right side of the equation by —. (Add to the equation so it looks like the
following:)
<2y1∖ J2∖
∖1A2∕ ∖1∕
211. Now that we have multiplied both sides of the equation by -, we can work
2 1the equation. What is — multiplied by —? 1
2 1Yes, so we can cross out - and - on the left side of the equation. (Add to 
the equation so it looks like the following:)
212. Now we work the right side of the equation. What is 9 times -? (Pause 
while students work.) 18
Now our equation looks like this: (Write the following next to the original 
equation on the board.)
b = 18
13. We changed both sides of the equation to find out that b = 18. What does 
b equal? 18

508 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.4 (continued)
SOLVING ONE-STEP PROBLEMS WITH
VARIABLES—MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION
TEACHER STUDENTS
14. We can check our work by rewriting the equation with 18 in the place of b. 
(Write the following on the board.)
τDoes 18 divided by 2 equal 9?
Yes, it does. So we know that b = 18 because 18 divided by 2 equals 9.
Yes
15. (Repeat with the following examples.) 14 = 2s, 5f = 25, 4 =
Part C: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. (Write problems like the following on the board. Give students paper and 
pencils for solving the equations.)
a. 5y = 30
b. 18 = 6e
21c. — = 7
X
d.45 = 5n
2. Read problem a. 5y = 30
3. We want to find the value for y. What do you need to do to get y by itself? Multiply by the 
reciprocal of 5
What's the reciprocal of 5? 1
1After you multiply the side of the equation with y by -, what will you do?
J
Multiply the other side 
τ , . , 1of the equation by Yes, whatever you do to one side of an equation you must do to the other.
4. Work the equation now to find the value of y. (Monitor students as they 
solve for×.)
5. What does y equal? y equals 6
6. You can check your work by rewriting the equation with 6 in the place of y. 
Do that now. (Monitor students.)
You put 6 in the place of y. Read the new equation. 5 times 6 equals 30
Does that make sense? Yes
Yes, it does. So your answer is correct.
7. (Repeat steps 2-6 with the remaining problems. Instruct the students to 
follow the same steps to find the value of the variable regardless of which 
side the variable is on.)

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 509
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part D: Independent Practice
1. (Write problems like the following on the board. Give students paper and 
pencils for solving the equations.)
a. 2t = 20
. ιθθb.-----= 25X
c. 80 = 20f
d. 13 = ∣
e. 9k = 9
2. Find the value of the variable in each of the equations. Remember to check 
your work by rewriting the equation with the value of the variable. (Monitor 
students as they work.)
Format 18.5
RATIO TABLES USING FRACTIONS FOR CLASSES (See Video in Part B)
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation: Figuring Out Fraction Number Families
1. (Put this problem on the board.)
Three-fifths of the bottles of glue in the store are white glue and the rest are 
super glue. If there are 26 bottles of super glue, how many bottles of white 
glue are in the store? How many total bottles of glue are in the store?
Read the problem with students.
2. This is a classification word problem. What words tell us about the classes in 
this problem?
3. What is the first class named in the problem? Underline that class.
4. What is the next class named in the problem? Underline that class.
5. What is the next class named in the problem? Underline that class.
(Write this on board.)____ +_____ =_____
6. Write a number sentence like the one on the board. (Pause.)
What is the big class?
Write that under the last blank. (Pause.)
7. So what are the two smaller classes?
Glue, white glue, 
super glue
Glue
White glue
Super glue
Glue
White glue and super 
glue
8. Where do we write those? Under the first two 
blanks
9. Do that now. (Pause.)
10. Let's look at the classes one at a time. Let's start with white glue. What 
fraction of the bottles of glue are white glue?
3
5
continued

510 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.5 (continued)
RATIO TABLES USING FRACTIONS FOR CLASSES
TEACHER STUDENTS
11. Where do we write —?
12. Do that now. Does the problem tell us what fraction of the bottles of glue is 
super glue?
13. What do we write over super glue?
14. Do that now. (Pause.) What do we write over the big class, glue?
5 515. Yes, -. The problem doesn't say —. So who remembers how we know that
the big class is equal to ~?
16. The big number is given, so do we add or subtract?
17. So what is the answer?
o
Part B: Structured Board Presentation: Ratio Tables
1. Now we are ready to draw and use a ratio table to solve problems. (Draw this 
table on the board and ask students to copy it.)
Over the blank labeled 
white glue.
No
A box
5
5
Because the big class 
is all of the glue, so it 
is equal to one whole, 
5
°r 5
Subtract
2
5
Fraction family Ratio Quantity
White glue
Super glue
Glue
2. We have just figured out the fraction number family. What fraction of the 
bottles is white glue?
3. Write ∣ in the fraction family column next to white glue.
4. What fraction is super glue?
5. Write that next to super glue. (Pause.)
6. What fraction do we write for the big class of glue?
7. Write - in the fraction family column. (Pause.)
8. Now we are ready to complete the ratio column. We write the numerators of 
our fractions in the ratio column.
What is the fraction for white glue?
What is the numerator?
Write the numerator in the ratio column. (Pause.)
2
5
5
5
3
5
3
5
3

Chapter 18 Pre-algebra 511
TEACHER
9. What is the fraction for super glue?
What is the numerator?
Write the numerator in the ratio column. (Pause.) 
10. What is the fraction for glue?
What is the numerator?
Write the numerator in the ratio column. (Pause.) 
(The completed table should look like the one below.)
Fraction family Ratio Quantity
White glue 3/5 3
Super glue 2/5 2
Glue 5/5 5
11. Now we are ready to solve the problem. We are going to do that by using 
ratio equations. We begin by writing into the table the quantity we know. 
Read the problem. (Pause.) What quantity of glue bottles is stated in the 
problem?
Write that quantity in the column across from super glue. (Pause.) Since we 
know the quantity of super glue, we call super glue the known quantity.
12. What does the problem ask us to find out first?
13. To find the answer, we are going to make a ratio equation of our known 
quantity, super glue, to our unknown quantity, white glue. First, we'll set up 
the ratio equation with the appropriate labels, then we'll fill in the known 
quantities
Here's how we write the ratio equation. We start by labeling the numerator 
and denominator in the first fraction like this. (Write the following equation 
on the board.)
super glue
white glue
Then we write an equal sign and write the labels for the fraction on the 
other side.
(Write the following on the board.)
super glue super glue
white glue white glue
Now we fill in the correct ratio for the first fraction. Look at the ratio 
column. What is the ratio of super glue to white glue?
Complete the ratio for the first fraction.
(Write the following on the board.)
2 super glue super glue
3 white glue white glue
STUDENTS
2
5
2
5
5
5
26 bottles of super 
glue
How many bottles of 
white glue were in the 
store
2
3
continued

512 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 18.5 (continued)
RATIO TABLES USING FRACTIONS FOR CLASSES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Now we fill in the known quantity for the second fraction. Look at the 26 bottles of super
quantity column and find the known quantity. (Pause.) What is the known 
quantity?
Write the known quantity in the appropriate fraction on the other side of 
the equation. (Write the quantity on the board.)
2 super glue _ 26 super glue
3 white glue white glue
14. Now we're ready to solve for the quantity of white glue. Write a box by the 
label for white glue in the equation.
2 super glue 26 super glue
3 white glue □ white glue
We solve this by using equivalent fractions.
We are looking for a fraction equal to one. What number times two
glue
equals 26?
So we write in 13 over 13.
2 super glue ∕13∖ _ 26 super glue
3 white glue ∖13√ □ white glue
Here's what you should have. What do we multiply to find out how many
13
bottles of white glue were in the store? 3 × 13
What's the answer? 39 bottles of white 
glue
15. Now we can fill in the quantity for white glue in the table. Where are we In the quantity column
going to write 39?
16. We now have 26 bottles for super glue and 39 bottles for white glue. How
next to white glue
do we find out how many bottles of glue in all? Add 26 and 39
What is your answer?
Write that in your table and you're done.
65 bottles of glue
