[p.531]
Appendix B Frequently Asked Questions About Direct Instruction Mathematics 53
E. Should Students be Allowed to Use Calculators in Math Class?
Issues regarding the use of calculators are similar to issues of manipulatives in that it is nc 
whether students use calculators but how and when they use them. Teachers must make inten 
tional decisions about the extent to which they will allow students to rely on calculators for com 
putation. If teachers do allow calculators, they must teach students to use them properly.
F. What Direct Instruction Mathematics Programs Are Commercially 
Aavailable?
Most of the commercially available Direct Instruction mathematics programs are discussed oi 
the website of the National Institute for Direct Instruction. These programs include:
■ DISTAR Arithmetic
■ Connecting Math Concepts
■ Corrective Math
■ Essentials for Algebra
■ Funnix Math
ISSUES OF INSTRUCTIONAL ORGANIZATION AND 
MANAGEMENT
A. Is Direct Instruction for Only Struggling Students?
Because Direct Instruction has been effective with struggling students and students receivin 
special education services, educators assume the strategies are appropriate only for students wh 
are struggling with mathematics. On the contrary, we believe the strategies are effective fo 
all students because they are well designed, generalizable, and clearly presented. The mistak 
many teachers make when using Direct Instruction with higher-performing students is pacin 
the instruction too slowly. These teachers may be providing more repetition and practice thaι 
is necessary for their students, or they may be teaching skills students already have acquired 
Careful monitoring of student progress allows teachers to differentiate instruction within thei 
classrooms to meet the needs of all of their students.
B. How Does a Direct Instruction Approach in Mathematics Work 
with Students with Special Needs?
The underlying philosophy of Direct Instruction is that all students can learn if give] 
well-designed instruction and opportunities for practice. Students with special needs ofte] 
require (a) well-designed, unambiguous, teacher-directed instruction and (b) more practic 
opportunities in order to master the skills presented.
As mentioned earlier, the Direct Instruction strategies in this text have been demonstrated t< 
be effective with a range of students. But the instruction is just one part of a multi-tiered systen 
of supports. Other essential components include assessment and service delivery. Assessmen 
must include provisions for appropriate initial screening and diagnostic testing, in addition t< 
continued progress monitoring that informs instructional decision-making. Service delivery iι 
this context refers to the systematic coordination of effort by general and special educators tha 
includes shared responsibility and collaborative problem solving.
Using the guiding principles of well-designed instruction and more practice opportuni 
ties, all teachers of students with special needs must discuss the who, what, where, and how o 
designing an effective program. Who will be responsible for teacher-directed instruction? Wha 
will be taught? Where will the student receive the instruction? How will the teachers orchestral 
additional practice opportunities? All of the above questions are relevant to the education o 
students with special needs.

[p.532]
Addend: The numbers of the smaller sets in an addition statement 
(e.g., in 4 + 3 = 7, the addends are 4 and 3).
Addition: Addition is (a) the process of combining smaller sets to 
form a larger set and then determining the total number of the larger 
set or (b) the union of two disjoint sets. Disjoint sets have no mem­
bers in common.
Alternating pattern: A method for providing practice after the 
introduction of a new fact that involves systematically review­
ing previously introduced facts interspersed with the new fact. 
For example, after a new numeral is introduced, a previously 
reviewed numeral is identified, then the new numeral is identi­
fied again, followed by two previously reviewed numerals, and 
so on.
Area: The number of square units it takes to cover a figure.
Base number: The number multiplied by itself when an exponent 
is present.
Circumference: The circumference is the distance around the out­
side of a circle.
Column alignment: Positioning two or more multi-digit numerals 
so that like place values are vertically aligned.
Commutative property: Adding or multiplying the same num­
bers in any order will produce the same result (5 × 3 = 15 
and 3 × 5 = 15; 10 + 4 + 31 = 45, 4 + 10 + 31 = 45, and 
31 + 4 + 10 = 45).
Complex addition facts: Addition facts that require a student to 
mentally add a single-digit number to a two-digit number.
Compound probability: The likelihood of two or more events 
happening together.
Decimal fractions: Fractions with a denominator of 10 or any 
power of 10: l1∕ιo, 1∕ιoo, 1∕ιooo, etc.
Decimals: Decimals are similar to fractions in that they both deal 
with something that has been divided into equal parts. Decimals 
are restricted, however, to situations with 10 parts or any power of 
10 (10, 100, 1000, etc.). In a decimal, the number of equal parts 
is not indicated by a denominator but rather through place value. 
The position of a numeral in relation to a decimal point expresses 
the number of equal parts. For example, one digit after the dec­
imal point indicates 10 equal parts; two digits after the decimal 
point indicate 100 equal parts. The value of the digit represents 
the number of parts present, used, or acted upon. For example, .5 
equals 5∕ιo and .5 represents a division into 10 equal parts with 5 
parts present.
Denominator: The bottom number in a fraction.
Descriptive statistics: Statistics that summarize a data set with 
measures of central tendency and variability.
Diameter: The diameter is a line running from one side of the 
circle to the opposite side through the midpoint.
Difference: The quantity remaining after the subtrahend is taken 
away from the minuend.
Distractor: Information given in a word problem that is not 
necessary to finding the solution to the problem
Distributive property: The distributive property of multiplication 
over addition says that if a, b, and c are whole numbers, then
a × (b + c) = (a × b) + (a × c)
This property is essential to understanding multiplication of 
multi-digit numbers such as 4 × 27. Expanded notation allows 
27 to be rewritten as 20 + 7. The problem 4 × 27 then becomes 
4 × (20 + 7), which equals (4 × 20) + (4 × 7). It is also import­
ant for later work with fractions, equations, and algebra.
Dividend: The number being divided. It corresponds to the product 
in a multiplication problem:
6 in 2)6
Division: The inverse of multiplication. When a student divides, 
she is finding a missing factor; 16 ÷ 8 can be expressed as 
8 × □ = 16.
Divisor: The factor that is given in a division problem. It is written 
in front of the division sign:
2 in 2)6
Effect size: Quantity that allows for comparison between two 
groups, usually an experimental group and a control group.
Equations: A statement of equality between two expressions.
Expanded notation: Writing a number to show the value of each 
digit. For example, 384 = 300 + 80 + 4.
Experimental probability: The number of times a specific event 
occurs compared to the total number of trials.
Exponent: A numeral written above and to the right of another 
numeral (the base) to indicate how many times the base has been 
multiplied by itself (53 = 5 × 5 × 5).
Expressions: Mathematical phrases that may include numbers, 
variables, and symbols for operations.
Factors: The multiplicand and the multiplier in a multiplication 
problem.
Fractions: A fraction is a numeral of the form y/x where x ≠ 0. 
Fractions involve division into equal-sized segments and a state­
ment regarding the number of segments present, used, or acted 
upon. For example, “John ate ¼ of a pie” implies that a pie was 
divided into four equal parts and that John ate one of those parts.
Functions: The relationship between a set of numbers.
Graph: Visual representation of a relationship between two or 
more sets of data.
Greatest common factor: Largest factor of both the numerator and 
the denominator; e.g., the greatest common factor for ⅝ is 4.
532

[p.533]
Identity element: Any number multiplied or divided by 1 is equal 
to that number.
Improper fraction: A fraction whose numerator is equal to or 
greater than the denominator.
Interquartile range: A measure of variability consisting of the 
difference between the first quartile and third quartile of a set of 
data.
Lowest common denominator: The least common multiple of the 
denominators; e.g., the lowest common denominator for ½ + ½ + ¼ 
is 12.
Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD): The average distance between 
each data point and the mean of a set of data.
Mean: Calculated by adding a group of numbers and dividing the 
sum by the number of numbers that were added; often referred to as 
the “average.”
Median: Middle number of a set of numbers that has been arranged 
in order of magnitude.
Minuend: Original quantity from which an amount is subtracted.
Missing addends: A problem type in which students solve for an 
addend (e.g., 6 + □ = 9).
Mixed decimal: An expression consisting of a whole numeral and 
a decimal: e.g., 3.24, 18.05.
Mixed numeral: An improper fraction expressed as a whole num­
ber and a fraction.
Mode: The most frequently occurring value in a collection of 
numbers.
Multiplicand: The number of units in each equal set.
Multiplication: The process of combining a specific number of 
sets, each including an equal number of elements, into a single 
larger set.
Multiplier: The number of sets in the multiplication process.
Negative integers: Whole numbers less than zero.
Numeral: The symbol associated with a particular number.
Numerator: The top number in a fraction.
Ordinal counting: Counting associated with position (first, second, 
third, etc.).
Percent: The symbol % is read “percent.” It represents the ratio of 
two quantities with the denominator being hundredths. The frac­
tion ⅜ may be converted to an equivalent fraction, 4θ∕ιoo, which in 
turn may be expressed as 40%. When presenting the various forms 
of rational numbers, teachers must consider their interrelatedness. 
Problem-solving strategies designed for teaching fractions should 
be presented in a manner that will prepare students for decimals. 
Likewise, the strategies presented for decimals should prepare 
students for percent.
Percentage: The number obtained by finding the percent of another 
number.
Perimeter: The perimeter of a polygon is the sum of the length of 
each of its sides.
Glossary 533
Pi: The ratio of a circle’s circumference to its diameter, commonly 
approximated as 3.14.
Place value: Each digit has 10 times the value of the digit immedi­
ately to its right in our decimal system.
Positive integers: Whole numbers greater than zero.
Prime factors: Factors of a number that are also prime numbers.
Prime numbers: Whole numbers greater than 1 that are evenly 
divisible only by 1 and themselves.
Product: The answer in a multiplication problem. The number des­
ignating elements in the combined set of a multiplication problem; 
i.e., the sum of all the equal sets.
Proper fraction: A fraction whose numerator is less than its 
denominator.
Quotient: The factor solved for in a division problem. It is written 
above the division sign:
3
3 in 2j6
Radius: The radius of a circle is the distance between the midpoint 
of the circle and the edge of the circle.
Range: The difference between the smallest and largest number in 
a set.
Ratio: The numerical expression of the relationship between two 
comparable quantities. Usually the ratio is the result of dividing the 
first quantity by the second.
Rational counting: Coordinating counting with touching objects to 
determine the quantity of a group.
Ray: A portion of a line that starts at a certain point and continues 
in a particular direction with no end.
Regrouping: Rearranging a quantity of objects (not numerals) as a 
greater and lesser unit; for example, 11111111111111111111111 can be 
regrouped as lllllll I I 11 I 111 I I 1111.
Renaming: Rewriting a numeral as a greater unit and a lesser unit; 
e.g., in 75 — 19, 75 is renamed as 60 + 15.
Rote counting: Identifying number names in sequence.
Skip counting: Counting in which students say multiples of a base 
number in order.
Subtrahend: The number that is subtracted from another.
Sum: The number of the new set formed by combining the smaller 
sets (e.g., in 4 + 3 = 7, the sum is 7).
Surface area: The total area of the surface of a three-dimensional 
figure.
Table: A table specifies the relationship among sets of numbers.
Term: A number or variable, or numbers and variables, multiplied 
by each other or separated by symbols (e.g. +, ÷, =).
Theoretical probability: Predicting the likelihood of an event 
using mathematics.
Volume: The number of cubic units of space inside a three- 
dimensional shape.