[p.10]
Chapter
Research Support for Direct 
Instruction Mathematics
By Kaitlyn Bundock and Timothy Slocum
LEARNING OUTCOMES
2.1 Discuss the rationale for improving U.S. math instruction.
2.2 Compare the differences between di and DI and the research support for each.
2.3 Outline three research-based recommendations for improving math instruction.
THE NEED FOR EXCELLENT MATH INSTRUCTION
Mathematical competence is important for living successfully in modern American society. 
It is a gateway to higher education as well as to success in many other career paths (Child 
Trends Databank, 2015). For example, studies have found that students who take higher- 
level math courses in high school are more likely to graduate from college (Adelman, 1999; 
Attewell & Domina, 2008). Our increasingly technological workplace raises the stakes for 
math proficiency—those with strong math skills can access numerous exciting career options 
in the new economy, while those who have weak math skills can be limited to fewer and 
less desirable career options. A great deal of evidence points to the conclusion that math 
competence is related to level and quality of employment (Finnie & Meng, 2006; Murnane, 
Willett, Braatz, & Duhaldeborde, 2001; Tyler, 2004). Further, the relationship between high 
school students’ math skills and their later earnings has grown stronger since 1976 (Murnane, 
Willett, & Levy, 1995; Reyna & Brainerd, 2007). During the 1990s, growth in employment 
in the math-intensive sectors of science and engineering tripled that in other areas of the 
economy (National Science Board, 2008). And the personal implications of mathematical 
proficiency are not limited to employment; math skills are required in everyday life for 
selecting purchases, managing finances, and understanding interest rates (Kirsch, Jungeblut, 
Jenkins, & Kolstad, 2002). Math skills are related to patients’ health behaviors and outcomes, 
their understanding of medical issues, and their implementation of treatments (Reyna & 
Brainerd, 2007).

[p.11]
Chapter 2 Research Support for Direct Instruction Mathematics 11
In addition to its impact on individual outcomes, mathematic competence is increasingly 
recognized as being important for the economic success of the nation (Reyna & Brainerd, 2007). 
As the National Mathematics Advisory Panel (NMAP) stated in 2008:
The eminence, safety, and well-being of nations have been entwined for centuries 
with the ability of their people to deal with sophisticated quantitative ideas. Leading 
societies have commanded mathematical skills that have brought them advantages in 
medicine and health, in technology and commerce, in navigation and exploration, in 
defense and finance, and in the ability to understand past failures and to forecast future 
developments, (p. 29)
Many states have responded to the importance of math proficiency by increasing demands 
for the number and level of mathematics courses required for high school graduation (National 
Mathematics Advisory Panel, 2008; Rasmussen et al., 2011). As a result, poor math skills can be 
a considerable barrier to receiving a high school diploma (Rasmussen et al., 2011).
Current Performance of U.S. Math Students
Despite an increased focus on enhancing the rigor of K-12 mathematics instruction in recent 
years, the math performance of students in the United States continues to be substandard. The 
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) measures the performance of American 
students in a variety of content areas (National Center for Education Statistics [NCES], 2015). 
Students in grades 4 and 8 are assessed in mathematics every 2 years. The 2015 NAEP results 
revealed that 49% of fourth graders and 57% of eighth graders failed to meet proficiency stan­
dards. This represents a worse performance than was seen only 2 years earlier. The situation is 
dire for underrepresented groups. For example, 87% of Black and 81% of Hispanic eighth grad­
ers were not proficient in math in the 2015 assessment (NCES, 2015). The National Mathemat­
ics Advisory Panel commented in 2008:
There are large, persistent disparities in mathematics achievement related to race and 
income—disparities that are not only devastating for individuals and families but also proj­
ect poorly for the nation’s future, given the youthfulness and high growth rates of the largest 
minority populations, (p. xii)
Similarly, students with disabilities experience very poor math outcomes. From 5% to 8% 
of U.S. students are identified as having learning disabilities in math (Bryant, 2005; Fuchs et al., 
2008; Jitendra & Star, 2011; Judge & Watson, 2011). Results on the NAEP indicate that 84% of 
fourth-grade students with disabilities and 92% of eighth-grade students with disabilities were 
not proficient in mathematics (NCES, 2015). These results are consistent with research showing 
that 95% of students with disabilities rank in the lowest 25th percentile on standardized math 
assessments throughout all grade levels (Gersten et al., 2012; Judge & Watson, 2011).
International comparisons consistently show that American students lag behind other 
industrialized countries in math proficiency. The Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD) administers the PISA test every 3 years in 65 countries to evalu­
ate 15-year-olds’ performance in reading, mathematics, and science (OECD, 2014a). The 2012 
PISA math results indicate that the United States ranked 27th among the 34 OECD member 
nations assessed (OECD, 2014b). Additionally, U.S. math scores were below the average of 
math scores calculated from all 65 countries assessed, and 25% of students in the United States 
tested below the basic proficiency level established by the PISA. The 2015 PISA focused pri­
marily on science, although data related to mathematics were obtained. The overall mathematics 
results indicate that students in the United States continued to perform below average compared 
to the other industrialized nations (OECD, 2016). The results of the PISA indicate that U.S. 
students struggle with real-world math problems, mathematical modeling, geometry, and math­
ematical literacy.
When the math results of all U.S. students are considered together, they reveal a nationwide 
need for instruction that improves the performance of students from all demographic groups. 
The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) published an “Agenda for Action”

[p.12]
12 PartI Perspective
in 1980, calling for a shift in mathematics education toward an emphasis on problem solving, 
cooperative learning, the use of manipulatives, and alternative ways of assessing students; 
these recommendations, however, were not based on research (NCTM, 1980). The NCTM later 
released “Principles and Standards for School Mathematics” in 2000 (NCTM, 2000). This guide 
presents a vision of mathematics education, as well as guidelines for educators, and includes 
principles (foundational precepts for quality mathematics instruction) and content and process 
standards.
By far the most important policy development in response to poor math outcomes is the 
Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM). Produced by the National Gover­
nors Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers in 2009, these standards were 
intended to raise educational achievement by creating a coherent and consistent sequence of 
standards that build to high-level achievement (Dingman, Teuscher, Newton & Kasmer, 2013; 
National Governors Association & Council of Chief State School Officers, 2012).
The majority of states have adopted the CCSSM, which are consistent with the NCTM 
principles and standards. The CCSSM represent four main shifts in math education: changes to 
the grade level in which certain math content is taught; adjustments made to the number of grade 
levels certain math topics span; shifts in emphasis on certain math topics; and development of 
the Standards for Mathematical Practice, which focus on problem-solving across the standards 
(Dingman et al., 2013; National Governors Association & Council of Chief State School Offi­
cers, 2012). The CCSSM are more rigorous than the previous standards that were in place in the 
majority of states, in part because one of the goals reflected in the CCSSM is that students mas­
ter higher-level algebra by the end of high school (Dingman et al., 2013; Schmidt & Houang, 
2012). As such, math concepts that are foundations for algebra are introduced at earlier grades, 
and they tend to be emphasized across a larger number of grade levels to provide more in-depth 
coverage (Schmidt & Houang, 2012). The changes in content associated with the CCSSM, in 
particular the increases in rigor, require educators to pay greater attention to effective teaching 
practices in mathematics. When mathematics instruction is highly effective, many students will 
meet the CCSSM standards and realize the benefits of high-level math competence. But if math­
ematics instruction is not effective, the higher standards represented by CCSSM will simply 
impose a barrier to school success and graduation. Therefore, these high standards increase the 
consequences of the quality of instruction. Now more than ever, it is imperative that mathemat­
ics instruction enable a wide range of students—including those at risk for failure in math—to 
achieve high levels of proficiency.
RESEARCH ON DIRECT INSTRUCTION
• ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
Direct instruction is a research-based approach to instruction that has been shown to be highly 
effective across many academic domains, including mathematics. This book is, of course, con­
cerned with using this method to teach mathematics. The specific meaning of the term “direct 
instruction” is somewhat complicated, however. When stated in lowercase letters, direct instruc­
tion is an instructional strategy that includes:
1. Content presented in small steps.
2. Explicit teacher modeling or explanation.
3. Guided student practice with gradually faded support.
4. Use of feedback including explicit corrections of errors.
5. Independent practice including cumulative review.
These strategies also have been termed “explicit instruction,” “effective instruction,” and 
“systematic teaching” (Archer & Hughes, 2011; Rosenshine & Stevens, 1986).
When the term is written as a proper noun with capital letters (“Direct Instruction”), it pri­
marily refers to instructional programs that include all the features of direct instruction (note 
the lowercase) and also have additional instructional design features, as described in Chapter 1, 
that make them even more effective for teachers and students. Commercially developed Direct 
Instruction (capital letters) programs organize the content around generalizable strategies that 
students can use to solve a wide variety of problems, and they implement detailed principles of

[p.13]
Chapter 2 Research Support for Direct Instruction Mathematics 13
clear communication to ensure that these generalizable strategies are conveyed effectively to 
students—including those at risk. Direct Instruction programs also include features to increase 
student engagement such as unison student responding and signals to coordinate those responses.
Explicit or direct instruction has been supported by hundreds of studies that describe the 
specific teacher behaviors that are most closely associated with strong academic outcomes. 
In 1986, Brophy and Good reviewed more than 200 publications that examined correlations 
between particular teacher behaviors and student achievement and derived the following 
recommendations:
■ Students should receive frequent opportunities to respond to questions, and they should get 
clear feedback about the correctness of their responses.
■ Skills should be mastered to overlearning, with new ones gradually phased in while old ones 
are being mastered.
■ Both progress through the curriculum and pacing within specific activities should be brisk, 
producing continuous progress achieved with relative ease (small steps, high success rate).
■ Individual progress should be closely monitored so that all students, especially struggling 
students, are checked, receive feedback, and achieve mastery.
Rosenshine and Stevens (1986) reviewed dozens of experimental studies in which teachers 
learned to use specific teaching techniques and student achievement was measured. Based on 
this research, they recommended that teachers:
■ Present new material in small steps, with student practice after each step.
■ Give clear and detailed instructions and explanations. 
■ Provide a high level of active practice for all students.
■ Ask a large number of questions, check student understanding, and obtain responses 
from all students.
■ Guide students during initial practice.
■ Provide systematic feedback and corrections.
■ Provide explicit instruction and practice for seatwork exercises and, where necessary, 
monitor students during seatwork.
For teaching academic subjects and improving student outcomes, large bodies of research 
converge upon the Direct Instruction model, which incorporates the above techniques.
Direct Instruction programs also have been subjected to extensive research. Project 
Follow Through, a federal education project, was implemented beginning in the late 1960s and 
was the largest organized experiment in the history of education. It involved nearly 100,000 
students in 170 communities across the country and cost nearly $1 billion (Watkins, 1997). 
The goal of Project Follow Through was to identify models of instruction that could close 
the gap in academic achievement between economically disadvantaged students and those 
from higher-income families. Researchers tested nine instructional models including Direct 
Instruction. Each was implemented in at least three schools, and each model school was paired 
with a similar control school. Outcome measures included three domains: (a) basic academic 
skills such as word knowledge, spelling, and math computations; (b) cognitive outcomes such as 
reading comprehension, math concepts, and math problem solving; and (c) affective outcomes 
such as responsibility and self-esteem.
Figure 2.1 summarizes the overall results of Project Follow Through. This figure clearly 
shows that Direct Instruction was the only model that demonstrated large positive effects in all 
three domains. These data indicate that Direct Instruction can be effective with students who 
are economically disadvantaged and that it can improve not only basic skills but also complex 
cognitive and affective outcomes (Engelmann, Becker, Carnine, & Gersten, 1988; Stebbins, 
St. Pierre, Proper, Anderson, & Cerva, 1977).
Figure 2.2 illustrates the math performance of third-grade students from each of the nine 
major models on the math subtest of the Metropolitan Achievement Test. The graph shows that 
students taught using the Direct Instruction model significantly outperformed students taught 
using the other models. In fact, the Direct Instruction students performed close to the 50th 
percentile, an outstanding feat considering the 50th percentile is the median for students of all 
income levels in the United States (Gersten & Carnine, 1984; Stebbins et al., 1977).

[p.14]
14 Part I Perspective
FIGURE 2-1 Direct Instruction was found to be highly effective for improving basic 
skills, cognitive skills, and affective outcomes in project follow through. Based on data 
from Stebbins et al. (1977)
Project Follow Through, 1967-1977
Nine models of teaching K-3 compared in history’s largest experiment
• Nine models grouped into three broad teaching approaches: academic focus, problem­
solving focus, or self esteem focus.
Findinαs, * τhrθθ cate9or∙θs of results were measured: basic academic skills, problem-solving skills, 
$ ' and changes in self-esteem.
• Direct Instruction produced the best results in all areas: basic skills, problem-solving, and 
self-esteem.
FIGURE 2.2 Direct Instruction was found to be highly effective for improving math 
performance in low-income students. Based on data from Stebbins et al. (1977)
Performance of Third-Grade Students on Math 
Subtest of Metropolitan Achievement Test
Students taught using the Direct Instruction model:
Findings: ∙ Significantly outperformed students taught using other 
models.
• Approached the 50th percentile.

[p.15]
Chapter 2 Research Support for Direct Instruction Mathematics 15
A great deal of research has been conducted on Direct Instruction since the time of Follow 
Through:
■ Adams and Engelmann (1996) conducted a meta-analysis of research studies in which one 
group received Direct Instruction while a comparable control group was taught with other 
methods. The work identified 37 such studies and found that, on average, they favored Direct 
Instruction by a very large margin (effect size = .87). Further, across these studies, Adams 
and Engelmann found 33 individual comparisons between a Direct Instruction group and 
comparison group on a measure of math performance. On average, these comparisons fa­
vored the Direct Instruction groups by an even larger margin (effect size = 1.11).
■ Borman, Hewes, Overman, and Brown (2002) performed a meta-analysis of 29 compre­
hensive school reform models based on 232 individual studies. They concluded that “the 
combined quantity, quality, and statistical significance of evidence from three models, in 
particular, set them apart from the rest” (p. 3). One of these models was Direct Instruction.
■ In a similar review, the American Institutes for Research conducted an independent review of 
24 prominent school reform models; it also concluded that Direct Instruction was one of only 
three models with strong evidence of positive effects on achievement (Herman et al., 1999).
■ The American Federation of Teachers (AFT) issued a series of research reviews that identi­
fied (a) promising programs for teaching reading and language arts (AFT, 1998a), (b) effec­
tive school reform models (AFT, 1998b), and (c) effective remedial reading programs (AFT, 
1999). In each case, Direct Instruction was one of a small number of models that were found 
to be well supported by research.
Taken together, the large and diverse body of research on Direct Instruction strongly 
supports its effectiveness for teaching a wide variety of academic subjects to diverse learners 
including those who are at risk for academic failure.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MATH INSTRUCTION
In response to an increased emphasis on the importance of mathematics for individual and 
national success, along with the need to address consistently poor student outcomes, President 
George W. Bush commissioned the National Mathematics Advisory Panel (NMAP) in 2006. 
Composed of respected education and mathematics experts, the panel was charged with rec­
ommending ways “to foster greater knowledge of and improved performance in mathematics 
among American students” based on “the best available scientific evidence” (NMAP, 2008, 
p. xiii). The panel’s 2008 final report was based on a review of 16,000 research publications and 
policy reports as well as public testimony from 110 individuals. This report provides recom­
mendations on curricular content, learning processes, teacher preparation, instructional practice, 
instructional materials, assessment, and research policies and mechanics (NMAP, 2008). With 
respect to instructional practice, the panel’s recommendations for advancing student perfor­
mance in mathematics included the use of explicit instruction, defined as:
■ Clear teacher modeling of problem types using an array of examples.
■ Extensive student practice of strategies and skills.
■ Provision of opportunities to think aloud.
■ Extensive feedback.
All of these elements of instruction are consistent with Direct Instruction. The panel’s rec­
ommendations confirm that the components of Direct Instruction are in fact highly effective for 
mathematics instruction. The same components identified in early research on direct instruction 
and built into the Direct Instruction programs are found in a careful examination of the research 
on effective math instruction.
More recent studies conducted by Slavin and his colleagues (Slavin & Lake, 2008; Slavin, Lake, 
& Groff, 2009) also found these instructional practices effective for improving student achievement 
in mathematics. Slavin and Lake (2008) reviewed 87 studies conducted with students in grades 
K-6. They compared approaches that focused on (a) mathematics curricula, (b) computer-assisted 
instruction, and (c) instructional process programs. Instructional process programs, they explained, 
are characterized as approaches that “focus on teachers’ instructional practices and classroom

[p.16]
16 Part! Perspective
management strategies rather than on curriculum or technology” (p. 430). For example, coopera­
tive learning and direct instruction would be considered to be instructional process programs. The 
authors then categorized the studies they reviewed as having strong, moderate, limited, or insuffi­
cient evidence of effectiveness based on the quality and significance of the results of each study. 
The studies showing the strongest evidence of effectiveness were all instructional process programs, 
with the exception of one computer-assisted instructional program being included in the moderate 
effectiveness category. The limited evidence of effectiveness category included only mathematics 
curricula programs. These results indicate that instructional process programs such as direct instruc­
tion have a greater potential to improve student performance than curricular or computer-assisted 
instructional programs do alone (Slavin & Lake, 2008).
Slavin and colleagues (2009) replicated this study with programs implemented in middle 
and high schools and found similar results. The primary implication from these two studies is 
that instructional process programs, such as direct instruction, are among the most promising 
methods to improve student achievement in mathematics at any grade level (Slavin & Lake, 
2008; Slavin et al., 2009).
The Institute for Educational Sciences (IES) is the research arm of the U.S. Department of Edu­
cation. Its mission is to provide scientific evidence to support practice and policy. The IES produces 
practice guides to provide usable information to educators. These practice guides are developed by a 
panel of leading researchers and are carefully reviewed for their scientific validity. The IES practice 
guide Assisting Students Struggling with Mathematics (Gersten, Beckmann et al., 2009) outlines 
specific recommendations to design and implement mathematics interventions including:
■ Screening all students to identify those at risk of math failure.
■ Using explicit and systematic instruction during intervention.
■ Instructing students to solve word problems based on common underlying structures.
■ Dedicating approximately 10 minutes of any intervention session to help students build flu­
ent basic arithmetic fact retrieval.
■ Monitoring students’ progress.
■ Including motivational strategies within interventions.
Again, these recommendations are closely aligned with Direct Instruction. In particular, the 
IES practice guide reported strong evidence in support of the recommendation that:
Instruction during the intervention should be explicit and systematic. This includes provid­
ing models of proficient problem solving, verbalization of thought processes, guided prac­
tice, corrective feedback, and frequent cumulative review, (p. 21)
The NMAP, the IES practice guide, and the work of Slavin and colleagues were focused 
mainly on students without disabilities. Gersten, Chard et al. (2009) conducted a meta-analysis 
that evaluated the results of 42 interventions conducted with students with learning disabilities 
in math. Of all of these interventions, Gersten and colleagues determined that the two instruc­
tional components that resulted in statistically significant increases in effect sizes were teaching 
students to use heuristics and the use of explicit instruction. The key elements of explicit instruc­
tion identified by the authors included teacher demonstrations of step-by-step processes to solve 
problems, the application of the strategies to a specific set of problems, and the requirement that 
students then use a specific step-by-step protocol to solve problems (Gersten, Chard et al., 2009).
While the particular purposes, methods, populations, and results of these various research 
syntheses differ, their recommendations converge on the use of an explicit and systematic 
approach to instruction that incorporates explicit teacher modeling, extensive student practice 
with feedback, and assessment of student progress. These recommendations give strong support 
to Direct Instruction Mathematics.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. Why should improving U.S. mathematics instruction be a priority?
2. Describe the differences between direct instruction and Direct Instruction.
3. Outline three research-based recommendations for improving math instruction.