[p.418]
Chapter
16
Data Analysis
LEARNING OUTCOMES
16.1 Outline the recommended sequence for teaching tables and different types 
of graphs.
16.2 Discuss activities that may be used to promote conceptual understanding 
of graphs and statistics.
16.3 Outline the teaching procedures for reading and interpreting different types 
of graphs.
16.4 Explain the general teaching procedures recommended for teaching descriptive 
statistics.
16.5 Describe the diagnosis and remediation procedures for addressing common 
errors in data analysis.
SKILL HIERARCHY
• ∙
An understanding of mathematics is often required to comprehend material from content areas 
such as science, social studies, or health. Mathematics in content-area material often appears in 
the form of tables, graphs, and descriptive statistics. For example, a health text might con­
tain a graph illustrating the relationship between changes in the occurrence of lung cancer and 
changes in the percentage of people who smoke. Or a table in a science text might provide infor­
mation about the size of, distance from the sun, and mass for the planets in our solar system. 
Descriptive statistics are central to the world of sports. For example, football statistics include 
the average number of yards gained per play. Baseball statistics including batting averages and 
earned run averages can be found on the websites of professional baseball teams. Students need 
specific skills to allow them to interpret information from a variety of sources.
The mathematics skills discussed in this chapter include reading and interpreting tables, 
graphs, and interpreting and calculating descriptive statistics. The Instructional Sequence and 
Assessment Chart lists the specific topics discussed in the chapter in their recommended order 
of introduction.

[p.419]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 419
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
K Classify and sort a. Sort objects like blocks, crayons, or candy by color 
b. Group pictures of vehicles by truck, car, or van
K Count the objects in a group and order '
multiple groups by size *
Count the number of crayons in each group and order the 
groups from fewest to most
κ Read and use a table for up to three Candies
categories of data Color of Candy Number of Candies
Red
Blue
Orange
1 Represent data for three categories Graph the number of objects in three categories using a 
bar graph
1 Interpret data for three categories using 
a bar graph 
∣
a. How many red candies were in the bag?
b. Are there more orange candies or blue candies?
c. How many more trucks are there than cars?
2 Represent data on a line plot—x-axis 
uses single unit scale
Measure three different pencils and plot the measurements
2 Construct picture and bar graphs using 
single unit scale for up to four categories
Graph the number of objects in four categories using picture 
and bar graphs
2 Solve simple problems using information 
presented in a bar graph
a. How many total vehicles are represented on the graph?
b. How many motorcycles and trucks are there?
c. How many more cars are there than vans?
3 Represent a data set with several 
categories using scaled picture and 
bar graphs
Graph the number of students in the school who choose 
red, yellow, blue, green, black, pink, or orange as their 
favorite color. Each unit represents 5 students.
3 Solve one- and two-step problems using 
information presented in scaled picture 
and bar graphs
a. How many students choose blue or orange as their favor­
ite color? Is this more or less than the number of students 
who choose green as their favorite color?
b. Which group is greater: the number of students who 
chose orange or pink as their favorite color or the number 
of students who chose black or green?
3 Represent data on a line plot using a 
scale of less than 1
Measure three different pencils and create a line plot show­
ing the measurements to the nearest ¼ inch.
Measure four different books and create a line plot showing 
the measurements to the nearest ½ inch.
4 Solve problems involving addition 
and subtraction of fractions using 
information from line plots
Given a line plot showing different measurement of pencils 
using a scale of less than 1, ask students questions like the 
following:
a. How much longer is pencil A than pencil B?
b. What is the total length of pencil B and pencil C?
5 Solve problems involving fractions using 
information from line plots
Given a line plot showing different measurements of candy 
bars using a scale of less than 1, ask students questions like 
the following:
a. How long would each candy bar be if they were laid end 
to end and then redistributed evenly?
continued.

[p.420]
420 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
6 Display data in dot plots, histograms,
and box plots
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART (continued)
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
6 Measures of center and variability Ms. Valerio gave a test to the 9 students in her class. The
marks are written below:
a. What is the range?
b. What is the median?
c. What is the mode?
Marcy 23 Diane 41
Kristen 18 Doug 35
Jerry 41 Kaitlin 41
Tim 23 Kathy 42
Donna 38
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING
Graphs and statistics summarize information visually and numerically. Graphs are easier to 
understand because they are visual representations of data and so are taught first. To introduce 
graphs, the teacher might give each student in the class a choice of four colors of square sticky 
notes and ask the students to choose their favorite color. On a white board, the teacher can draw 
the x-axis (number of students) and y-axis (favorite color). Students create a graph by placing 
their favorite color of sticky note on the corresponding column. After all of the students have 
placed their sticky notes on the graph, the teacher and the students can discuss the information 
represented on the graph. The initial questions would focus on the number of sticky notes in 
each column. Then the teacher could ask the students to compare columns.
Favorite Color of Sticky Note
Statistical concepts are more difficult but also can be introduced with a visual representa­
tion. The concept of average may be represented as “fair share” or as a “balance point.” Show­
ing average using the fair share method can be illustrated with very simple picture graphs. The 
simple graph on next page shows the distribution of cookies among six students. The illustration 
shows how the cookies could be shared so that each student has the same number of cookies, a 
fair share. Fair share also may be demonstrated using concrete objects.

[p.421]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 421
Distribution of Cookies
Fair Share of Cookies
Student Cookies
Maria θ o• A
Andre o © o +^+
Luis o V' o A
Eddie • Λ
Katie
Simone © © o ■
The statistical concept of mean can be shown as the point on a balance bar. In the represen­
tation that follows, the sum of the distances from the mean of all the data points lower than the 
mean is equal to the sum of the distances of all the data points higher than the mean. We rec­
ommend using a balance bar representation as a method for verifying the calculation of the 
mean. The balance bar representation allows students to clearly see how the distances from the 
center are equal. In this example, the x’s above the 1 are three units from the mean (3 + 3). 
The x above the 2 is two units from the mean. The sum of the distances from the mean for all of 
the x’s below the mean is calculated by adding 3 + 3 + 2. A similar calculation is applied to 
determine the sum of the distances of the x’s above the mean.
X 
XXX 
XX X XX
------- 1---------- 1--------- 1---------- 1----------1---------- 1---------—I----------1--------
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Distance from the mean: A Distance from the mean:
3+3+2=8 / ∖ 2+3+3=8
GRAPHS
∙∙∙∙∙∙*∙
A graph is a drawing or visual representation of a relationship between two or more sets of 
numbers. Figure 16.1 includes examples of the various types of graphs students will encounter 
in the elementary grades. This chapter provides instructional recommendation for three types 
of graphs: bar graphs, line plots, and picture graphs. Graphs are typically introduced during 
first grade.
The sequence for introducing various types of graphs should be carefully coordinated with 
numeral reading and fraction skills so that students have mastered all of the related component 
skills before being asked to read graphs. Simple graphs are introduced first.

[p.422]
422 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
FIGURE 16.1 Types of graphs
b. horizontal F
TH
∣ w 
Q
T
M
_ ' _ ]
............ ∣
2. Line Plot
1 1 1 1 Γ 1 1 1
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Points
×
× XX
X X X X XX
X××XXX××X XX
1011 1213141516171819202122 23
3. Picture Graph Extra Recesses Earned
Week 1 7^7
Week 2
Week 3 ¼Γ ¼Γ ¼Γ ¼r
Week 4 7⅛ '7Λ
Teaching students to interpret graphs involves modeling how to find information on the graph 
to answer a specific question. For example, students may be given a bar graph that shows the num­
ber of points Sarah scored in basketball games for each month of the school year. The teacher 
would first introduce the features of the graph and model how to answer a question using the graph.
A variety of literal questions should be included in initial examples. Literal questions ask for 
the amount at a particular time (“How many points did Sarah score in September?”) or the partic­
ular time on which a specified quantity was given (“In which month did Sarah score 80 points?”). 
Questions calling for comparisons should be introduced gradually and eventually represent 
a greater proportion of the total questions (“How many more points did Sarah score in January 
than in September?”). Finally, questions requiring students to make inferences based on data from 
graphs, the most difficult type of question, should be included after students have mastered answer­
ing literal and comparison questions (“Why do you think Sarah scored more points in May than in 
September?”). More detailed information about teaching students how to read graphs can be found 
in Chapter 21, “Direct Instruction in Content-Area Reading,” in Direct Instruction Reading (2016).
Classifying, Representing, and Interpreting Data
A table specifies the relationship among sets of numbers. Tables are introduced in kindergar­
ten but remain a part of data analysis throughout elementary and middle school. Beginning in

[p.423]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 423
Candies
FIGURE 16.2 Table for collecting data in early grades
Color Number of Candies
Red candy
Blue candy
Orange candy
6
4
1
kindergarten, students are taught to gather and classify data. Format 16.1: Classifying Objects 
into Categories outlines the teaching procedure for introducing students to classifying objects 
from one broader category into three subcategories. In Part A, the teacher presents a set of trian­
gles, circles, and squares to the students and leads them through determining how many of each 
shape is present. The data obtained by sorting the shapes are written by the teacher as three equa­
tions (e.g. △ = 2). In Part B, the students are given a structured worksheet with a set of shapes. 
The teacher leads the students in determining how many of each shape there are and completing 
the equations. Part C is a less structured worksheet in which the students independently count 
different shapes and complete the equations.
After students are able to accurately classify items of one broader category into at least three 
subcategories, they may be taught to record the data in a table. Initially, the table would include 
the name of the category of the objects as the title, the names of the subcategories, and a place 
for the students to record data related to each of the subcategories. The teacher would instruct 
the students to classify a set of objects into the appropriate subcategories and then record the 
number of items in each subcategory in the relevant box. Figure 16.2 is an example of a table 
that may be used for this purpose.
In addition to teaching students how to record data in a table, teachers need to explicitly 
teach students how to read data from a table. A preskill for working with tables is knowledge of 
the terms “row” and “column.” Teachers can explain the terms by showing students that rows in 
a table go across the page and columns go up and down the page.
The procedure for teaching students to read tables follows a model-test sequence using a 
table like the one below. The teacher first points out the title of the table to identify the topic. 
The teacher then points out the heading in each column and discusses the type of informa­
tion found under each heading. After leading students through identifying the headings, the 
teacher points out how the students read across each row. Finally, the teacher models the strat­
egy for locating information by looking for the intersection of rows and columns.
Trees in Our Parks
Lincoln Park Grant Park Washington Park
Oak 16 8 2
Maple 3 17 14
Fir 5 19 11
After teaching students about the features of a table, the teacher must present carefully 
designed questions that require the students to use the table. Initially, these questions should be lit­
eral. A literal question can be answered by simply referring to the chart (“How many oak trees are 
in Washington Park?”). Comparative questions requiring students to tell the difference between 
two pieces of information (“How many more fir trees than maple trees are in Grant Park?”) would 
be presented after students have mastered using a table to answer literal questions.
Picture Graphs
A picture graph is a type of graph that uses pictures to represent the relationships between two 
or more sets of numbers. We recommend introducing picture graphs in first grade, following

[p.424]
424 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
instruction in reading and creating tables. Format 16.2: Creating Picture Graphs describes the 
teaching procedures for introducing pictures graphs in the early elementary grades. This format 
clearly illustrates the conceptual relationship between tables and graphs.
Picture graphs are more difficult when each picture stands for a quantity other than one. For 
example, a picture graph in which each symbol represents 100 units is more difficult than a pic­
ture graph in which each symbol represents one unit. In the illustration below, each smiley face 
represents 100 people. Interpreting picture graphs is even more difficult when fractional parts 
of a symbol are used. For example, in the illustration below, half of a smiley face represents 
50 people (one-half of 100).
Bar Graphs
This text includes two introductory formats for reading and creating bar graphs. Format 16.3: 
Reading Bar Graphs outlines the procedures for teaching students to read and interpret bar 
graphs. Part A is a structured board presentation in which the teacher explains the features of 
a bar graph and models reading the graph to obtain information. In Parts B and C, the teacher 
provides practice on reading and interpreting bar graphs on worksheets.
Format 16.4: Creating Bar Graphs describes the procedures for teaching students to 
construct bar graphs from data provided in a table. The format follows a model-lead-test pro­
cedure in which the teacher models using data from a table to create a bar graph and then 
leads students through the steps of constructing their own bar graphs. The procedures in these 
formats may be adapted for use with students in the upper grades. Adaptations would address 
extending these procedures to include more complex data, comparative questions, and hori­
zontal presentations.
Two major factors determine the difficulty of interpreting bar graphs: (a) the amount of 
information on the graph and (b) the need for estimating amounts. Bar graphs become more 
complex as they show more than one set of relationships. For example, a simple bar graph may 
show the performance of one group of students on a series of tasks. A more complex bar graph 
would show the performance of several groups of students all on the same graph with separate 
bars representing each group. In reading a graph with more than one set of data, the student must 
be able to use the graph’s key to determine which bar refers to which group. A bar graph with 
three sets of data is illustrated in Figure 16.3.
Bar graphs also become more complex when the top of the bar does not correspond exactly 
with a numeral on the y-axis and students must estimate the value shown by the bar, as shown in 
Figure 16.3. For example, when examining the relationship between 1 hour of watching TV and 
the average grade for third-period students, the top of the bar is between 90% and 100%. The 
students must estimate the average grade as 93%.
Line Plots, Stem and Leaf Plots
These two graphing procedures, included in most math curricula, may be new to some teachers. 
Line plots can be introduced in early elementary grades. A Une plot illustrates the frequency of 
every data point on a number line. For example, the following are the results of a quiz taken by 
21 students: 16, 14, 17, 14, 19, 11, 17, 12, 22, 18, 11, 16, 14, 12, 13, 16, 17, 15, 13, 16, and 21. 
When developing a line plot, these data are placed on a number line. In this example each score 
is represented by an “x.”
X
X XX
X X X X XX
XXXXX××XX XX
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

[p.425]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 425
Relationship Between Hours of TV Watching and Grades
FIGURE 16.3 Bar graph with three sets of data
Amount of TV Watched
Stem and leaf plots typically introduced in middle school also illustrate the frequency of 
every data point in a set. The stem contains the tens digits. The leaf shows the ones digit for 
each of the data points. The illustration below shows the frequency of the test scores used in the 
example above:
Stem Leaf
1 1122334445666677789
2 2
In the example above, the first score, 11, is represented by a stem of 1 and a leaf of 1. The 
second score of 11 is represented by the same stem of 1 and the second leaf of 1. The third score 
of 12 is represented by the stem of 1 and the leaf of 2. Likewise, the score of 22 is represented 
by the stem of 2 and the leaf of 2. Both line plots and stem and leaf plots can be used to illustrate 
the shape of distributions prior to introducing the concept of the normal curve. The procedures 
outlined in Format 16.4: Creating Bar Graphs may be adapted to teach students how to read 
and create line plots and stem and leaf plots.
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Descriptive statistics are numbers used to describe sets of data. The most common descriptive 
statistics are measures of central tendency (mean, median, and mode) and measures of variabil­
ity (range, mean absolute deviation, and interquartile range). Although students begin work­
ing with data and graphs in first grade, descriptive statistics are not commonly introduced until 
middle school. Because some of these statistical calculations may be unfamiliar, we provide a 
brief review of each prior to discussing the recommended teaching procedures.
Measures of Central Tendency
The mean, the most commonly used descriptive statistic, is calculated by adding a group of 
numbers and dividing the sum by the number of numbers that were added. For example, the 
mean of the numbers 24, 26, 20, and 30 is calculated by adding these numbers and then dividing 
the sum, 100, by 4; the mean (100 ÷ 4) is 25.
The median is the middle number of a set of numbers that has been arranged in order of 
magnitude. An example that might be used involves test scores for a class of nine students. First, 
the scores are listed in order:
64, 70, 70, 70, ® 92, 94, 94, 98

[p.426]
426 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
The median is the middle score, 78. Four students scored less than 78, and four scored more than 
78. The median is relatively easy to determine when working with an odd number of scores as 
in the example in previous page. If there are 17 scores, the median is the ninth number: eight 
numbers are smaller and eight are larger. The median is more difficult to determine for an even 
number of scores because there is no middle score. When there is an even number of scores the 
middle two numbers must be averaged. For example, if eight students score 13, 17, 19, 20, ∣ 24, 
28, 31, 37, the median falls between 20 and 24 and is computed by calculating the average of 
these numbers. In the example below, the median equals 22.
20 + 24 44-----------= — = oo
The mode denotes the most frequently occurring value in a collection of numbers. For 
example, when examining the following scores—64, 70, 70, 70, 78, 92, 94, 94, 98—we note that 
one student scored 84, three scored 70, one scored 78, one scored 92, two scored 94, and one 
scored 98. The score that occurred most often, 70, is the mode.
Statistical concepts should be introduced cumulatively, beginning with the mean. When 
students have mastered computing the mean, the median can be introduced. Similar teaching 
procedures can be used to teach each statistical concept. The teacher defines the term, models 
how to calculate the statistic, and then leads the students through application problems.
Sets of problems should reflect cumulative review. After each new statistical concept is 
introduced, the teacher should present exercises in which the students apply all the statistical 
concepts previously introduced. For example, if mean and median had been taught previously 
and mode had just been introduced, the teacher should present an exercise in which the students 
must compute all three statistics (mean, median, and mode).
We have included a format for teaching how to calculate a mean. Format 16.5: 
Calculating the Mean contains two parts. In Part A, the structured board presentation, the 
teacher presents two steps: (a) add the numbers (the sum) and (b) divide the sum by how many 
numbers were added. When initially presenting the format, examples should be prepared so 
that the mean is a whole number; that is, the sum of the quantities must be a multiple of the 
divisor. A problem in which the sum is 24 and the divisor is 5 would be inappropriate because 
24 is not a multiple of 5.
Part B is a structured worksheet that requires students to calculate means for real-world 
problems. Note that the teacher asks students to read the problem and identify the first step in 
calculating the mean. After students add all the values, the teacher asks the students to complete 
the calculation. Finally, students write the answer with the appropriate label. We recommend 
constructing sets of four to five problems for each daily worksheet. As previously noted, after 
students have mastered calculating the mean, a demonstration illustrating the concept of mean 
with a balance bar may be presented to confirm the calculation.
The procedures for teaching median are similar to those for teaching mean. The teacher 
would present a structured board presentation in which he first defines median and then demon­
strates finding the middle score (median) with both an odd number and an even number of scores 
in data sets that have been organized by magnitude. A less structured board presentation would 
lead students through the two steps to find the median: (a) arranging the numerals in order and 
(b) using the procedure previously presented in the structured board presentation. Having stu­
dents first arrange numerals in order is an important step needed for determining median in 
everyday situations where data rarely appear in order of magnitude.
Note that examples need to include sets of data that have the same numeral more than once 
so that students practice including each numeral when arranging the numerals by magnitude. For 
example, when given the data set 100, 98, 75, 100, 69, 98, 85, students would need to order the 
set as 100, 100, 98, 98, 85, 75, 69, resulting in a median of 98. If each numeral were listed once 
(100, 98, 85, 75, 69), students would incorrectly identify 85 as the median.
Students need to learn when to use median rather than mean as a measure of central ten­
dency. Teachers can introduce the concept of outliers by teaching the rule “We use median as 
a measure of central tendency when the data include outliers.” The teacher then would have 
students apply the rule to sets of examples that require the students to discriminate when to use 
mean and when to use median.

[p.427]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 427
Measures of Variability
Measures of variability describe the dispersion of a set of data. In this chapter, we include rec­
ommendations for teaching range, mean absolute deviation (MAD), and interquartile range. 
Range, the easiest measure of variability to determine, refers to the difference between the 
smallest and largest number in a set. For example, the distances that girls in Mr. Adams’s 
class can throw the shotput are 32 ft., 29 ft., 41 ft., 18 ft., 27 ft., and 42 ft. The range is com­
puted by subtracting 18 ft., the lowest score, from 42 ft., the highest score: 42 — 18 = 24. 
The range is 24 ft.
Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) is the distance of each data point from the mean of 
the set. Prior to teaching the calculation for MAD, students must be taught the concept of abso­
lute value. Absolute value, the distance of a number from 0, is always positive. The absolute 
value of both 7 and —7 is 7. We recommend teaching absolute value by initially using the phrase 
“distance from 0” instead of the term “absolute value” to avoid teaching a new concept and new 
vocabulary simultaneously. The term “absolute value” easily can be introduced after students 
demonstrate understanding of the concept. With knowledge of absolute value, calculating MAD 
is not difficult but still requires several steps.
Summary Box 16.1 outlines the steps for calculating MAD. The first step is to calculate the 
mean for the set of numbers. The second step is to determine the deviation (difference) of each 
number from the mean. The next step is to find the absolute value for each deviation. The final
'summary j BOX 16.1
Calculating Mean Absolute Deviation
Find the MAD for this data set.
Data Set: 48, 52, 54, 55, 58, 59, 60, 62
Step 1. Find the mean. 48 + 52 + 54 + 55 + 58 + 59 + 60 + 62 = 448.
448 ÷ 8 — 56.
The mean is 56.
Step 2. Find the deviation of each Number - Mean Deviation from Mean
number from the mean. 48 - 56 -8
52 - 56 -4
54 - 56 -2
55 - 56 -1
58 - 56 2
59 - 56 3
60 - 56 4
64 - 56 8
Step 3. Find the absolute value of the Deviation from Mean Absolute Deviation
deviation from the mean. -8 8
-4 4
-2 2
-1 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
8 8
Step 4. Find the mean of the absolute 8 + 4 + 2+1 + 2 + 3 + 3 + 8 = 32
deviations (MAD). 32 ÷ 8 = 4
MAD = 4

[p.428]
428 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
step is to calculate the mean of the deviations by adding the absolute values of all of the devia­
tions and dividing that sum by the number of absolute values that were added.
Interquartile range also requires several steps. Summary Box 16.2 outlines the steps in 
determining the interquartile range. The first step is to determine the median of the data set. 
Next, the median of the first half of the set and the median of the second half are identified, 
resulting in four parts or quartiles. Finally, to find the interquartile range, the median of the first 
half is subtracted from the median of the second half of data.
The example in Summary Box 16.2 has 10 numbers in the set, an even number of items. 
Because finding the median of an odd number of items is different, the procedure for finding the 
interquartile range varies when there is an odd number of values. For example, the following 
set includes an odd number of values: 5, 5, 7, 8,(∏), 12, 15, 15, 16. The median, 11, is circled 
in blue. There are four numbers in the first half of the data and four in the second. In the case of 
having an odd number of values, the median is not part of either half. Therefore, in the example, 
11 is not used in finding the medians of the first or second half. As illustrated below, the median 
of the first half is 6 and the median of the second half is 15. The interquartile range, the median 
of the second half minus the median of the first half, is 9 (15 - 6).
First Half Second Half 
5, 5,17, 8,12, 15,115, 16 
Median: 6 Median: 15
We recommend teaching MAD and interquartile range using the steps outlined in 
Summary Boxes 16.1 and 16.2. Teachers would first present the steps in the calculations, mod­
eling several examples. Next, teachers would guide students through the calculations. As when 
teaching other statistics, we recommend following initial instruction with worksheets providing 
independent practice in using descriptive statistics.
SUMMARY j
Calculating Interquartile Range
Data Set: 8, 10, 10, 11, 11, 11, 12, 13, 13, 14
Step 1. Find the median.
8, 10, 10, 11, 11,111, 12, 13, 13, 14 
The median is 11.
Step 2. Find the medians of the first and second half 
of the data set.
Step 3. Subtract the median of the first half from 
the median of the second half to find the 
interquartile range.
First Half Second Half
8,10,θ,11,11, 11,12,013,14
13 - 10 = 3
DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION
Data analysis errors can be organized into the same categories that have been used throughout this 
text: fact errors (missing a math fact), component-skill errors (calculation or confusion errors), 
and strategy errors. The diagnosis and remediation procedures for the skills and concepts taught 
in both the Graphs and Descriptive Statistics sections should begin with determining the cause 
of the error. Both of those sections include discussions of critical discriminations and concepts, 
such as constructing and reading graphs that represent fractional values or understanding the 
need to include all of the values in order of magnitude when finding medians. Those discussions 
are designed to alert teachers to possible confusions that could be the cause of student errors. 
As always, teachers need to confirm their diagnosis by interviewing the students or by carefully 
examining written work. Once the diagnosis has been confirmed, the remediation usually involves 
reviewing critical parts of the relevant formats and providing students with additional practice.
Examples of common errors for graphs and descriptive statistics are outlined in Figure 16.4 
along with suggested remediation procedures.

[p.429]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 429
FIGURE 16.4 Data analysis diagnosis and remediation
Error Pattern Diagnosis
Not estimating the 
value from a bar 
graph
Remediation Procedures
The teacher would point 
out that the bar is halfway 
between 1 and 2 miles 
and ask the students, 
"What fraction is halfway 
between 1 and 2?"
Remediation Examples
Provide additional 
questions that require 
students to estimate the 
value of a bar. Include 
questions that do not 
require estimation.
How many miles did Manuel run 
on Monday? Answer: 1 mile
Find the median:
9, 11, 15, 11, 12
Student's Work:
9, 11, 12, 15
Median is 11.5
Find the mean:
12, 6, 4, 7, 9, 6
Student's Work:
12 + 6 + 4 + 6 + 7 + 9 = 44
44 ÷ 5 = 8.8
Students do not 
include repeated 
occurrences of a 
single number when 
determining median
Student did not 
divide by the total 
number of values in 
the data set
Remind students that 
every value must 
be included when 
determining the median.
Remind students to divide 
the sum of all of the 
values in the data set by 
the number of values in 
the data set, even when 
two values are repeated.
Provide additional 
examples of data sets, 
some with repeated 
values and some without.
Provide additional 
examples of data sets, 
some including repeated 
values.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. Explain how visual and numerical representations of data sets are related and sequential.
2. Why does the text recommend that teachers use the balance bar representation after teaching students 
to calculate the mean of a set of numbers?
3. For each pair of questions below, tell which is more difficult and how the difficulty is addressed by 
the instructional recommendations.
Pair one
a. How many houses were built in 2014?
b. How many houses were built in 2016?
Pair two
a. How many more houses were built in 2017 than 2014?
b. How many more houses were built in 2016 than 2015?

[p.430]
430 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
4. How are students taught when to use the median rather than the mean for calculating measures of 
central tendency?
5. Below are errors made by several students while solving the following word problem. Tell the cause 
of each error. Specify the remediation procedure.
Ashley played in 5 basketball games. She scored 25 points in the first game, 15 points in the second 
game, 17 points in the third game, 21 points in the fourth game, and 22 points in her last game. What 
was her average?
(⅛ηce RosnOSt
25 25 19.8 25 200
15 15 5W~ 15 5)Tθδ
17 17 5 17
21 21 49 21
22 ±22 45 ±22
100 99 40 100
Format 16.1
SORTING
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Display the following for the students.)
ΔO□OΔO□O
2. (Point to the shapes.) Here's a row of shapes. Tell me each shape when I 
touch under it. (Touch first shape.)
(Repeat with each of the following shapes.)
3. (Point to ∕∖ = .) We're going to complete the equations that show the 
total of each shape. I'm going to cross out each triangle as you count it. 
Count as I touch each triangle. (Cross out each triangle as it is counted.) 
How many triangles are there?
(Write 2 after ∕∖ = .)
4. (Point to θ = .) Now we're going to find out how many circles there 
are. Count as I touch each circle. (Cross out each circle as it is counted.) 
How many circles are there?
(Write 4 after θ = .)
5. (Point to = .) Now we're going to find out how many squares there 
are. Count as I touch each square. (Cross out each square as it is counted.) 
How many squares are there?
(Write 3 after = .)
6. (Point to ∕∖ = 2.) How many triangles are there?
7. (Point to ζ3 = 4.) How many circles are there?
Triangle
1, 2
2
1, 2, 3, 4
4
1, 2, 3
3
2
4

[p.431]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 431
TEACHER STUDENTS
8. (Point to = 3.) How many squares are there? 3
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Present a worksheet like the following to the students.)
2. (Point to the circles.) These are shapes. Tell me the name of each shape 
when i touch it (Touch a circle.)
(Repeat with cubes and stars.)
3. You're going to complete the equations that show the total for each 
shape. Look at the circles. Count and cross out each circle. (Pause while 
students count.) How many circles are there?
Write 4 on the line next to the circle. (Check students' work.)
4. Look at the cubes. Count and cross out each cube. (Pause while students 
count.) How many cubes are there?
Write 4 on the line next to the cube. (Check students' work.)
5. Look at the stars. Count and cross out each star. (Pause while students 
count.) How many stars are there?
Write 1 on the line next to the star. (Check students' work.)
6. How many circles are there?
7. How many cubes are there?
8. How many stars are there?
(Repeat with additional examples.)
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Present a worksheet like the following to the students.)
Circle
4
4
1
4
4
1
2. These are shapes. You're going to complete the equations that show 
the total for each shape. Count and cross out the smiley faces first. Then 
write the total number of smiley faces on the line next to the smiley face. 
Do the same thing for the stars and the hearts.
(Repeat with additional examples.)

[p.432]
432 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 16.2
CREATING PICTURE GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. Γm going to show you how to use data from a table to make a picture 
graph. Here is what I know about some of my friends:
(Display the following for the students.)
Favorite Ice Cream Flavor
Flavor Number of Friends
Chocolate 5
Strawberry 2
Vanilla 1
(Point to "Chocolate.") Five of my friends like chocolate ice cream best.
(Point to "Strawberry.") Two of my friends like strawberry ice cream best.
(Point to "Vanilla.") Only one of my friends likes vanilla best.
2. (Display the following for the students.)
This is the chart Γm going to use to create a picture graph. A picture 
graph uses pictures to show how many. What does a picture graph do?
Yes, a picture graph uses pictures to show how many. The first thing I 
need to do is label my picture graph. This picture graph is going to show 
how many of my friends chose chocolate, strawberry, or vanilla as their 
favorite ice cream, so I'm going to label this picture graph "Favorite 
Ice Cream Flavor." (Write "Favorite Ice Cream Flavor" at the top of the 
picture graph.)
3. Now, I need to label each of my rows. This picture graph is going to show 
my friends' favorite ice cream flavors. What's the first flavor on my table? 
Yes, chocolate. (Write "Chocolate" in the top cell of the first column.)
4. (Repeat step 3 for labeling the second and third rows as "Strawberry" 
and "Vanilla.")
5. Now that my picture graph and all of the rows have labels, I can use 
pictures to show how many friends chose each flavor. The picture Γm 
going to use for this picture graph is a smiley face. Look at the table. 
How many of my friends chose chocolate as their favorite flavor?
6. Yes, 5. So I'm going to draw five smiley faces in the row for chocolate to 
show that five of my friends chose chocolate. (Draw 5 smiley faces in the 
chocolate row.)
7. Look at the table. How many of my friends chose strawberry as their 
favorite flavor?
8. Yes, 2. So I'm going to draw two smiley faces in the strawberry row to 
show that two of my friends chose strawberry. (Draw 2 smiley faces in 
the strawberry row.)
It uses pictures to show how 
many.
Chocolate
5
2

[p.433]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 433
TEACHER STUDENTS
9. (Repeat steps 7 and 8 with "Vanilla." The finished picture graph should 
look like the following.)
Favorite Ice Cream Flavor
Chocolate (^) (S)
Strawberry (o)
Vanilla
(Repeat steps 1-9 with additional examples.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give the students a worksheet like the following.) 
Table:
Favorite Pizza Toppings
Cheese 2 people
Pepperoni 4 people
Olives 2 people
Peppers 3 people
Picture Graph:
2. You're going to use the information in the table to make a picture 
graph. What does this table tell us about?
3. Yes, this table tells us about favorite pizza toppings. What's the first 
topping the table tells us about?
Yes, cheese. How many people chose cheese as their favorite topping?
4. What's the next topping the table tells us about?
Yes, pepperoni. How many people chose pepperoni as their favorite 
topping?
5. (Repeatstep 4 for "Olives" and "Peppers.")
6. The first thing we need to do when making a picture graph is label the 
picture graph. What will this picture graph tell us about?
Yes, write "Favorite Pizza Toppings" in the space at the top of the 
picture graph. (Check students' labels.)
7. The next thing you need to do is label each of the rows. What's the 
first topping in the table?
Yes, write "Cheese" in the box for the first row. (Check students' labels.)
8. What's the next topping in the table?
Yes, write "Pepperoni" in the box for the second row. (Check students' 
labels.)
Favorite pizza toppings
Cheese
2
Pepperoni
4
Favorite pizza toppings
Cheese
Pepperoni
continued

[p.434]
434 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 16.2 (continued)
CREATING PICTURE GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
9. (Repeat step 8 for "Olives" and "Peppers.")
10. Now that your picture graph and all of the rows have labels, you can 
use pictures to show how many people chose each topping. Use a 
triangle to show 1 person. Look at the table. How many people chose 
cheese as their favorite topping?
Yes, 2. Draw two triangles in the row next to "Cheese" to show that two 
people chose cheese as their favorite topping. (Check students' work.)
11. Look at the table. How many people chose pepperoni as their favorite 
topping?
Yes, 4. Draw four triangles in the row next to "Pepperoni" to show that 
four people chose pepperoni as their favorite flavor. (Check students' work.)
12. (Repeat step 11 for "Olives" and “Peppers." The finished picture graph 
should look like the following:)
2
Favorite Pizza Toppings
Cheese
PepperoniΔΔΔΔ
Olives
Peppers ΔΔΔ
(Repeat steps 1-12 with similar worksheets.)
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Present students with a worksheet like the following.)
Rainy days

[p.435]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 435
TEACHER
3. That's right, rainy days. You're going to make a picture graph that tells 
how many rainy days there were in each month. Remember to label 
your picture graph first, then label each of the rows, and then draw the 
pictures to show how many rainy days there were in each month. If you 
don't know how to draw a cloud or a raindrop, you can draw a circle 
to show each rainy day. (Monitor students as they create their picture 
graphs.)
(Repeat steps 1-3 with similar worksheets.)
STUDENTS
Format 16.3
READING BAR GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Display the following for the students.)
2. This is a bar graph. A bar graph uses a bar to show how many. What 
does a bar graph do?
3. This bar graph tells about people and their favorite fruits. (Point to the 
labels along the x-axis.) These words tell the types of fruit. What do 
these words tell?
4. (Point to the numerals along the y-axis.) These numerals tell how many people 
said each type of fruit was their favorite. What do these numerals tell?
5. (Point to "Apple.") I want to know how many people said apples were 
their favorite. To find out, I'm going to touch the line for zero just above 
the word apple. (Touch "Apple.") Then I'm going to slide my finger up 
the bar until I reach the top of the bar. (Slide finger to the top of the 
bar and keep finger there.) Now, I can slide my finger over to find the 
numeral for the line that I'm touching. (Slide finger to the left and touch 
15.) Γm touching "15." That means that 15 people said apples were their 
favorite. How many people thought apples were best?
It uses a bar to show how 
many.
The types of fruit
How many people said each 
type of fruit was their favorite
continued

[p.436]
436 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 16.3 (continued)
READING BAR GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. (Repeat step 5 for "Banana" and "Strawberry.")
7. 1 want to know which fruit the most people said was their favorite. I can 
look at the bars and find the tallest bar. The bar for apples is the tallest 
bar. (Point to the bar for apples.) That tells me that the most people said 
that apples are their favorite fruit.
8. (Repeat steps 1-7 with additional examples.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give the students a worksheet like the following.)
1. How many pink pencils were in the jar?
2. How many yellow pencils were in the jar?
3. How many blue pencils were in the jar?
4. What color were most of the pencils in the jar?
2. This bar graph shows how many pink, yellow, and blue pencils 
were in a jar.
3. Read number one.
Look at the bar graph and figure out how many pink pencils were in the 
jar. (Pause.) How many pink pencils were in the jar?
Write 6 in the space by number 1 (Monitor students' responses.)
4. (Repeat step 3 for numbers 2-4.)
How many pink pencils 
were in the jar?
6

[p.437]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 437
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Present students with a worksheet like the following.)
1. How many snowy days were in December?
2. How many snowy days were in January?
3. How many snowy days were in February?
4. Which month had the most snowy days?
2. This bar graph shows how many snowy days there were in December, 
January, and February. The bar shows how many snowy days there 
were in each month. Use the information in the bar graph to answer the 
questions on the worksheet. (Monitor students' responses.)
(Repeat steps 1 and 2 with additional examples.)
Format 16.4
CREATING BAR GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. I'm going to show you how to use data from a table to make a bar graph.
Here is what I know about the pets in my neighborhood:
(Display the following for the students.)
Pets in My Neighborhood
Pet Number of Pets
Dogs 4
Cats 3
Fish 6
(Point to “Dogs.") There are four dogs in my neighborhood. (Point to 
"Cats.") There are three cats in my neighborhood. (Point to "Fish.")
There are six fish in my neighborhood.
continued

[p.438]
438 Part HI Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 16.4 (continued)
CREATING BAR GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
I'm going to create a bar graph. A bar graph uses a bar to show how 
many. What does a bar graph do?
Yes, a bar graph uses a bar to show how many. The first thing I need 
to do is label my bar graph. This bar graph is going to show how many 
dogs, cats, or fish are in my neighborhood, so Γm going to label this bar 
graph "Pets in My Neighborhood." (Write "Pets in My Neighborhood" at 
the top of the bar graph.)
3. Now, I need to label the parts of my bar graph. (Point to the x-axis.) 
This part is going to show each type of pet, so I'll write dog, cat, and 
fish under this line. (Write dog, cat, and fish under the ×-axis. The graph 
should now look like the following:)
It uses a bar to show how 
many.
5. Now that my bar graph has labels, I can show how many of each pet 
are in my neighborhood. Look at the table. How many dogs are in my 
neighborhood? 4
6. Yes, 4. So Γm going to color above where it says "Dogs" until I 
come to the line for four. This will show how many dogs are in my 
neighborhood. (Color in the column above "Dogs" beginning at zero 
and coloring up until the line for four is reached. Model counting out 
loud for the students while coloring.)
7. Look at the table. How many cats are in my neighborhood? 3
8. Yes, 3. So I'm going to color above where it says "Cats" until I come to 
the line for three. This will show how many cats there are. (Color in the 
column above "Cats" beginning at zero and coloring up until the line 
for three is reached. Model counting out loud for the students while 
coloring.)

[p.439]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 439
TEACHER STUDENTS
9. (Repeat steps 7 and 8 with "Fish." The finished bar graph should look 
like the following:)
10. We've created a bar graph! What is our bar graph about? 
(Repeat steps 1-10 with additional examples.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
Pets in my neighborhood
1. (Give the students a worksheet like the following.) 
Table:
Favorite Sports
Soccer 7 students
Football 8 students
Baseball 5 students
3. Yes, this table tells us about favorite sports. What's the first sport the 
table tells us about?
Yes, soccer. How many students chose soccer as their favorite sport?
4. What's the next sport the table tells us about?
Yes, football. How many students chose football as their favorite sport?
Favorite sports
Soccer
7
Football
8
5. (Repeat step 4 for "Baseball.")
6. The first thing we need to do when making a bar graph is label the 
parts of the bar graph. What will this bar graph tell us about?
Yes, write "Favorite Sports" in the space at the top of the bar graph.
(Check students' labels.)
Favorite sports
continued

[p.440]
440 P∕∖RT III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 16.4 (continued)
CREATING BAR GRAPHS
TEACHER STUDENTS
7. The next thing you need to do is label the other parts of the bar graph. 
What's the first sport in the table?
Yes, write "Soccer" in the first space at the bottom of the bar graph. 
(Check students' labels.)
8. What's the next sport in the table?
Yes, write "Football" in the second space at the bottom of the bar 
graph. (Check students' labels.)
9. (Repeatstep 8 for "Baseball.")
10. Now that your bar graph has all of its labels, you can make a bar for 
each sport. Look at the table. How many students chose soccer as their 
favorite sport?
Yes, 7. Touch "soccer." Color above the word "soccer." Start coloring at the 
line for zero and continue coloring up until you get to the line for 7. This 
bar will show that seven students chose soccer. (Check students' work.)
11. Look at the table. How many students chose football as their favorite 
sport?
Yes, 8. Touch "football." Color above the word "football." Start 
coloring at the line for zero and continue coloring up until you get to 
the line for 8. This bar will show that eight students chose football. 
(Check students' work.)
12. (Repeat step 11 for "Baseball." The finished bar graph should look like 
the following:)
Soccer
Football
7
13. We just made a bar graph about our favorite sports! 
(Repeat steps 1-13 with similar worksheets.)

[p.441]
Chapter 16 Data Analysis 441
TEACHER
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Present students with a worksheet like the following.) 
Table:
STUDENTS
Bar Graph:
Number of Cupcakes
Chocolate 9
Banana 10
Vanilla 6
Cupcakes
3. That's right, cupcakes. You're going to make a bar graph that tells how 
many chocolate, banana, and vanilla cupcakes there were. Remember 
to label your bar graph first, then write the labels that go below the 
bar graph, and then make the bar for each kind of cupcake. (Monitor 
students as they create their bar graphs.)
(Repeat steps 1-3 with similar worksheets.)
Format 16.5
CALCULATING THE MEAN
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. Listen: In basketball practice, Ben scored 4 points on Monday, 7 points on 
Tuesday, 3 points on Wednesday, and 6 points on Thursday. (Write 4, 7, 
3, 6.) We want to figure the average number of points Ben scored each 
day. What do we want to figure out?
2. Here's how we figure out Ben's average. First we add; then we divide 
the sum by how many numbers we added. First we add; then what do 
we do?
3. First we add. (Write the problem on the board.)
4
7
3
+ 6
The average number of 
points Ben scored each day 
of practice
Divide the sum by how 
many numbers we added
What is the sum of 4, 7, 3, and 6? 20
continued

[p.442]
442 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 16.5 (continued)
CALCULATING THE MEAN
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. The sum is 20. We added. Now we divide by how many numbers we 
added. (Point to 4, 7, 3, and 6 as you say,) We added 1, 2, 3, 4, numbers.
5. We added 4 numbers, so we divide 4 into 20. What do we divide? 4 into 20
How many times does 4 go into 20? 5
Yes, Ben's average is 5 points each day. What is Ben's average? 5 points each day
Did Ben score exactly 5 points every day?
5 points a day is his average.
(Repeat steps 1-5 with the examples below.)
Jill scored the following points in each game: 6, 8, 9, 5, 0, 10, 4.
Tom ran these numbers of miles each day: 3, 1, 1, 7, 0, 0.
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students worksheets with several problems like the one below.)
Jack ran 5 miles on Monday, 2 miles on Tuesday, 4 miles on Wednesday, 
0 miles on Thursday, and 9 miles on Friday. What is the average number 
of miles he ran each day?
No
2. Read the problem. What does the problem ask for? The average number of 
miles he ran each day
3. What do we do first to figure the average? Add the miles
Add all the miles. How many miles did he run altogether? 20
4. What do we do after we find the sum? Divide by how many 
numbers we added
5. How many numbers did we add? 5
Say the division problem. 5 goes into 20
How many times does 5 go into 20?
Write 4 in the box.
4
6. Now we have to label our answer. Read the last sentence.
So the label is miles each day.
What is the average number 
of miles he ran each day?
What is the label for the answer?
Write the words. (Pause.)
Miles each day
Say the whole answer.
(Repeat steps 2-6 with additional problems.)
4 miles each day