[p.17]
Chapter
Curriculum Evaluation 
and Modification
LEARNING OUTCOMES
3.1 Discuss the critical components of a curriculum adoption process.
3.2 Outline major topics that should be included in a curriculum evaluation.
3.3 Describe recommendations for modifying mathematics curricula.
In this chapter, we present a framework for evaluating and modifying commercially developed 
mathematics programs. We derived this Mathematics Curriculum Framework from the Direct 
Instruction principles of instructional design that we outlined in Chapter 1 and the research find­
ings outlined in Chapter 2.
Given the role that instructional programs play in the classroom, especially for teachers 
who have not been well prepared to teach mathematics, the quality of commercially developed 
mathematics programs should be closely scrutinized. We designed the framework outlined here 
to help teachers evaluate mathematics programs—both to select new programs and to modify 
the mathematics programs available to them. While the Mathematics Curriculum Framework is 
not exhaustive, it will help teachers focus their curriculum evaluation efforts and identify areas 
in mathematics programs that can easily be enhanced to foster student success.
THE CURRICULUM ADOPTION PROCESS
Curriculum materials should reflect a high degree of instructional integrity, include well-designed 
content, develop ideas in depth, and clarify the relationships among topics. Commenting on the 
role that curriculum likely played in the results of the 2002 Trends in International Mathematics 
and Science Study (TIMSS), Schmidt and colleagues (2002) stated, “The curriculum itself— 
what is taught—makes a huge difference” (p. 12).
While the term “curriculum” technically is not synonymous with “program,” in this chapter 
we use the terms “curriculum materials” and “instructional programs” interchangeably to refer 
to those commercially developed mathematics programs used by both general and special 
education teachers.

[p.18]
18 Part I Perspective
Many educators are surprised to learn that most publishers do not routinely evaluate the 
effectiveness of their programs, either during development or while in use (Jobrack, 2011; 
Reys, Reys, & Chavez, 2004). Because research is costly, publishers tend not to invest in 
extensive research on their programs. Given the limited availability of scientific evidence of 
the effectiveness of math instructional programs, educators need to examine programs carefully 
prior to purchasing and implementing them in their classrooms.
The process of choosing a curriculum is critical to the selection of high-quality instructional 
materials. Educators should employ a systematic framework for both adopting and evaluating 
instructional materials. Stein, Stuen, Carnine, and Long (2001) described some of the critical 
features of a systematic adoption process for the selection of literacy programs. Not surprisingly, 
these features also should be present when selecting mathematics programs. Although a thor­
ough discussion of the adoption process is beyond the scope of this chapter, we have highlighted 
the features from Stein and colleagues that we believe are essential to conducting an effec­
tive curriculum adoption in the area of mathematics. These features include time allocation, 
committee responsibilities, and the screening process.
Time Allocation and Committee Responsibilities
A major consideration in the adoption of curriculum materials is allocating sufficient time for the 
work of an adoption committee. Many curriculum adoption committees meet only after school 
for brief periods of time. But meaningful and thorough examination of instructional materials 
requires large blocks of uninterrupted time. Therefore, curriculum adoption committees must be 
given adequate release time to review the materials and discuss findings and questions with their 
colleagues. During this time educators on the adoption committee would review research, gener­
ate screening and evaluation criteria, screen all submitted programs, thoroughly evaluate three to 
four of those programs, deliberate, and then select a program.
Teachers in schools or districts often are given the opportunity to vote on the selection of 
a mathematics program from a short list generated by an adoption committee. Given that the 
adoption committee members are given adequate time to evaluate the mathematics programs 
thoroughly, we recommend that the final selection of an instructional program rest with the 
adoption committee. To feel comfortable with a committee decision, however, teachers should 
be kept informed at all stages of the adoption process. Therefore, adoption committee members 
must communicate regularly and effectively with the groups they represent.
Members of mathematics curriculum adoption committees are often selected based on 
seniority and knowledge of mathematics. But additional factors also should be considered when 
forming the committees. Committees should include individuals representing a range of grade 
levels, those representing both special and general education students, and those with excellent 
communication skills.
Screening Process
To expedite the task of evaluating instructional programs, we recommend that the adoption 
committee first screen all the programs submitted for consideration. Evaluating programs 
thoroughly requires a substantial time commitment, and screening will reduce the number of 
programs that the committee must evaluate.
The first step in the screening process is to determine the criteria that will be used. Table 3.1 
illustrates an example of criteria that we believe will facilitate the screening process. The criteria 
include questions that address two important areas: Evidence of Effectiveness and Critical 
Content. On the form, there are two columns next to each evaluation question. One column is 
designated for comments to record brief answers to the evaluation questions. The second column 
is designated for examples that support the comments that are made in the evaluation.
The questions under Evidence of Effectiveness direct evaluators to determine if the pro­
gram has been systematically evaluated in controlled research studies that have been pub­
lished in the scientific literature. In addition to published research, evidence of whether the 
program has been field-tested is considered in this section as well. Several resources are 
available to assist teachers in finding evidence-based instructional programs. For example, 
Hughes, Powell, Lembke, and Riley-Tillman (2016) discuss the concept of evidence-based

[p.19]
Chapter 3 Curriculum Evaluation and Modification 19
TABLE 3-1 Mathematics Curriculum Framework: Screening Criteria Form
Evaluation Questions Comments Examples
A. Evidence of Effectiveness
1. Is there published evidence of the 
effectiveness of the program?
2. Is there evidence that the program has been 
field-tested with large groups of students?
B. Critical Content
1. Is the content taught using explicit 
strategies?
2. Does the instruction follow a logical 
sequence?
3. Are there sufficient practice opportunities 
for mastery distributed across the grade 
level?
practices and provide their readers with resources that may be used when evaluating instruc­
tional programs.
The questions under Critical Content can be used to compare how different programs teach 
important skills or concepts. We recommend that for screening purposes, evaluators compare 
two skills from each program they are considering in two grade levels (one early grade and 
one later grade). By comparing how programs teach these skills, evaluators can get a sense of 
the overall program design. The questions selected for screening purposes are similar to those 
that form the more comprehensive set of evaluation questions that appear in the Mathematics 
Curriculum Framework, which we discuss below.
TOPICS FOR CURRICULUM EVALUATION∙∙∙∙∙∙..
On the following pages we present details about our Mathematics Curriculum Framework for exam­
ining commercially developed mathematics programs (see Table 3.2). The framework consists of 
two sections: General Program Design and Specific Content Design. As in the screening form, this 
form has two columns corresponding to each evaluation questions: Comments, and Examples. The 
Examples column is included so that evaluators can provide specific references to program exam­
ples that illustrate and support their comments. These examples are necessary if evaluators are to 
engage in objective discussions about program quality with other committee members.
General Program Design
The following questions are included in the General Program Design section of Table 3.2:
1. Does the program provide a logical sequence of skills and concepts?
2. Are objectives stated as observable and measurable behaviors?
3. Does the program integrate conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, and problem 
solving in a coherent manner?
Does the Program Provide a Logical Sequence of Skills and Concepts? The purpose 
of the General Program Design criteria is to provide evaluators with a clear overview of the 
program. The questions in this section address design features relevant to all levels. To answer 
these questions, we recommend that evaluators examine the scope and sequence of each level as 
well as sample lessons in grades K-8.
When examining the scope and sequence of a program, it is helpful to establish if the 
program is organized using a spiral or strand design. In programs using a spiral design, many

[p.20]
20 Part I Perspective
TABLE 3.2 Mathematics Curriculum Framework: Evaluation Form
Evaluation Questions Comments Examples
A. General Program Design
1. Does the program provide a logical sequence 
of skills and concepts?
2. Are objectives stated as observable and 
measurable behaviors?
3. Does the program integrate conceptual 
understanding, procedural fluency, and 
problem solving in a coherent manner?
B. Specific Content Design
1. Strategy Instruction
a) Are the steps in the target strategy 
explicitly outlined?
b) Is the strategy of intermediate 
generalizability—not too narrow or 
too broad?
2. Preskills
Are the necessary preskills identified and 
taught prior to introducing the strategy?
3. Example Selection
a) Are introductory examples provided for 
initial mastery?
b) Are there opportunities for discrimination 
practice?
4. Practice and Review
a) Does the program provide sufficient 
opportunities for practice when new skills 
are introduced (massed practice)?
b) Does the program provide opportunities for 
cumulative review (distributed practice)?
Note 3.1:
Consult the Instructional 
Sequence and Assessment Charts 
for Chapters 4-18. These charts 
provide a logical sequence of 
instruction for each chapter topic 
and corresponding performance 
indicators that can serve as 
examples of observable and 
measurable objectives. (Link 
to Chapter 4, instructional 
Sequence and Assessment 
Chart, for example.)
topics are introduced at each level and repeated across many levels. Typically, programs that use 
a spiral design lack adequate initial instruction and review to promote student mastery. Lessons 
in these programs usually cover a different topic each day. Schmidt et al. (2002) referred to 
programs organized using a spiral design as “a mile wide and inch deep” (p. 12).
Recently, more instructional programs are being organized using a strand design (Snider, 
2004). These programs present fewer topics over a longer period of time and have a pronounced 
focus on student mastery. A unique feature of strand design is that lessons are organized around 
multiple topics. For example, a single lesson at the fourth-grade level might include some work 
on multiplication facts, subtraction with regrouping, fraction analysis, and measurement.
Are Objectives Stated as Observable and Measurable Behaviors? Program objec­
tives help teachers determine exactly what students should be able to do as a result of the 
instruction provided. The objectives should contain a statement of a measurable behavior. Many 
programs contain objectives that describe teacher behavior but not student behavior. For exam­
ple, we found objectives similar to this one in several mathematics programs: “Review telling 
time.” Note that the objective identifies what the teacher is to do but not what the students do. 
Alternatively the following time-telling objective is stated as a measurable behavior: “Students 
will express time as minutes after the hour.”

[p.21]
Chapter 3 Curriculum Evaluation and Modification 21
Note 3.2:
Consult Chapter 13, Skill 
Hierarchy Chart, for an example 
of how instruction on fractions 
is integrated in and across grade 
levels. Note how the relationships 
among fraction topics are 
interwoven into a coherent 
sequence.
Note 3.3:
Consult the teaching 
formats in Chapters 4-18 for 
examples of explicit strategy 
instruction. Click here to review 
Format 10.8: Correct Estimated 
Quotients with Two-Digit 
Divisors as an example. See 
how clearly it illustrates the level 
of explicitness typical of Direct 
Instruction.
©
Note 3.4:
Click here to consult 
Format 13.3: Writing Numeri­
cal Fractions for an example of 
a generalizable strategy that pro­
motes conceptual understanding 
of both proper and improper 
fractions.
Does the Program Integrate Conceptual Understanding, Procedural Fluency, and 
Problem Solving in a Coherent Manner? Coherence in this framework refers to the 
extent to which the content of the program is integrated within and across grade levels and to 
the balance and integration of instruction that addresses conceptual understanding, procedural 
fluency, and problem solving. Research has identified program coherence as a common char­
acteristic of the curricula used in the top-performing countries participating in international 
assessments such as the TIMMS. Consequently, one of the recommendations of the National 
Mathematics Advisory Panel directly addresses program coherence:
A focused, coherent progression of mathematics learning, with an emphasis on proficiency 
with key topics, should become the norm in elementary and middle school mathematics 
curricula. Any approach that continually revisits topics year after year without closure is to 
be avoided. (NMAP, 2008, p. 22)
Specific Content Design
The Specific Content Design section of the Mathematics Curriculum Framework is divided into 
four main sections: Strategy Instruction, Preskills, Example Selection, and Practice and Review. 
The evaluation questions for each section are discussed below.
Strategy Instruction Instructional strategies may be the most important component of a 
mathematics program. We recommend that evaluators select three to four different skills or con­
cepts for each grade level and use the evaluation questions specified to examine how systemati­
cally the skills or concepts are taught.
We recommend that evaluators conduct a skill trace when evaluating instruction strategies. 
A skill trace involves locating every instance where the target strategy appears in the program. 
The skill trace helps evaluators isolate the instructional strategy to best evaluate its explicitness 
and generalizability. The skill trace for each of the target skills then can be used to answer the 
following questions:
a. Are the steps in the target strategy explicitly outlined?
b. Is the strategy of intermediate generalizability—not too narrow or too broad?
To determine the explicitness of a strategy, evaluators should examine where in the pro­
gram the strategy is first introduced and determine whether the program clearly articulates the 
steps that students follow to solve a problem (either a computation problem or word problem). 
When evaluating instructional strategies, evaluators should pretend that they do not already 
know how to solve the problem and follow the steps in the strategy as specified in the teacher’s 
manual. By doing this, evaluators can more easily determine whether the steps in the strategy 
are explicit and useful.
A well-designed, efficient strategy should reliably lead students to the solution of a range of 
related problem types. Teachers should not spend valuable instructional time teaching a narrow 
strategy, one that is of limited use. For example, the shortcut for finding 1/3 of 9, dividing 9 
by 3, works only when the fraction in the problem has a 1 in the numerator. Low-performing 
students are likely to overgeneralize this strategy when asked to find 2/3 of 9 and answer incor­
rectly. Similarly an overly broad strategy can lead to confusion. “Guess and check” is one such 
strategy in that it provides little guidance to students in solving problems.
Preskills The explicit strategies discussed above all require the integration of component 
skills that when put together comprise the steps in the generalizable strategy. As mentioned 
in Chapter 1, these component skills also may be referred to as preskills. Often mathematics 
programs introduce preskills and the strategy in which they are embedded simultaneously. Most 
students need time to master the requisite preskills prior to being introduced to a strategy that 
requires their application. For example, a commercial program may introduce estimation at 
the same time that it introduces long division with a strategy requiring the use of estimation. 
Determining whether the necessary preskills for a given strategy have been identified and taught 
will help evaluators compare programs.

[p.22]
22 Part I Perspective
4 Note 3.5:
W0' Consult "Preskills" in 
the section on Two-Digit Divisors 
in Chapter 10 for a discussion 
of the preskills required prior to 
introducing double-digit division 
and corresponding recommenda­
tions for teaching those preskills.
Note 3.6:
Consult "Complex 
Renaming Problems" in the sec­
tion on Multi-Digit Subtraction in 
Chapter 8 and Part E of
Format 8.3: Subtraction 
with Renaming for an 
example of appropriate 
example selection.
This text includes a discussion of the requisite preskills for each instructional strategy 
presented in Chapters 4-18. These discussions may be embedded in the introduction to specific 
instructional content, have its own dedicated section within a chapter, and/or may be presented 
in its own unique teaching format.
Example Selection The types of examples used to teach specific content are critical to 
ensuring students successfully apply the strategies they are taught. Evaluating the examples pro­
vided in a program involves determining not only the number of examples initially provided but 
also the quality of those examples. The following two questions are important to consider when 
evaluating example selection:
a. Are introductory examples provided for initial mastery?
b. Are there opportunities for discrimination practice?
Introductory examples are examples that provide practice only on the newly introduced 
skill. For example, when students are introduced to addition with renaming from the ones col­
umn to the tens column, they should be given only practice examples that require renaming from 
the ones column to the tens column. The question of whether there are sufficient numbers of 
introductory examples can only be answered using information about student performance. (Did 
students master this skill with the number of introductory examples available?)
Discrimination practice refers to including a set of practice examples that requires students 
to determine when to apply a strategy and when not to. For example, after providing initial 
practice on addition with renaming, the program should give students the opportunity to practice 
renaming using a set of examples in which some problems require renaming and some do not. 
Without discrimination practice, some students will try to apply the renaming strategy indis­
criminately to any multi-digit addition problem they encounter.
Evaluators will need to compare programs with respect to the number and type of exam­
ples (introductory and discrimination) provided. We recommend evaluators err in selecting 
programs with more rather than fewer examples. Reducing the number of practice examples 
presented is far easier for the teacher than creating additional examples for students who need 
more practice.
Specific recommendations for example selection are embedded throughout Chapters 4-18. 
These recommendations can be found in the initial discussion of instructional content, corre­
sponding instructional formats, and/or recommendations for remediation.
Practice and Review One of the features of a well-designed mathematics program is the 
presence of adequate and systematic review for the strategies introduced. Well-designed pro­
grams include two types of practice and review. First, the program should provide practice that 
is adequate for students to initially learn the content (massed practice). The section above on 
example selection addresses appropriate examples for such practice.
The second type of practice and review is distributed practice, practice over time so that 
students do not forget what they have learned. Distributed practice also can be referred to as 
cumulative review, as discussed in Chapter 1. Cumulative review in instructional programs is 
the presence of repeated opportunities for practice throughout a specific grade level. Cumulative 
review is related to the notion of strategic integration in that the review of newly introduced 
strategies is integrated and reviewed with previously introduced strategies.
By examining the practice examples available for several strategies, evaluators can 
determine the extent to which a program provides these types of review. Distributed 
practice may occur in isolation as simple independent review activities or embedded 
in related, more sophisticated content. For example, evaluators should inspect whether 
a program provides massed practice when initially introducing long division and 
whether the program includes opportunities for distributed practice (cumulative review) 
throughout the grade level, either as a set of independent computation problems or as a 
component of solving word problems.
The following questions from Table 3.2 are relevant to practice and review:
a. Does the program provide sufficient opportunities for practice when new skills are introduced 
(massed practice)?
b. Does the program provide opportunities for cumulative review (distributed practice)?

[p.23]
Chapter 3 Curriculum Evaluation and Modification 23
MODIFYING MATHEMATICS CURRICULUM
The evaluation criteria based on Direct Instruction design principles outlined in this chapter can 
be applied to curriculum modification. Note that while no individual instructional program will 
meet the needs of all students, adopting programs that require less modification is undoubtedly 
preferable as those programs require fewer changes and save teachers time.
TABLE 3.3 Mathematics Curriculum Framework: Modification Form
Evaluation Questions Potential Problems General Modification Guidelines
A. General Program Design
1. Does the program provide a logical 
sequence of skills and concepts?
2. Are objectives stated as observable 
and measurable behaviors?
3. Does the program integrate 
conceptual understanding, 
procedural fluency, and problem 
solving in a coherent manner?
Skills are not presented in a logical 
sequence.
Objectives are lacking, vague, and/or 
not measurable.
Program lacks one or more of the 
following and/or fails to integrate: 
conceptual understanding, procedural 
fluency, or problem solving.
Determine missing skills from the 
instructional sequence and assessment 
charts in the related chapter and reorder 
the sequence of instruction.
Generate measurable and observable 
objectives.
Determine what aspects of the instruc­
tion are missing and provide supplemen­
tal instruction or reconsider the choice 
of instructional program.
B. Specific Content Design
1. Strategy Instruction
a) Are the steps in the target strat­
egy explicitly outlined?
b) Is the strategy of intermediate 
generalizability—not too narrow 
or too broad?
2. Preskills
Are the necessary preskills identified 
and taught prior to introducing the 
strategy?
3. Example Selection
a) Is there a sufficient number of 
practice examples for initial 
mastery?
b) Are there opportunities for 
discrimination practice?
4. Practice and Review
a) Does the program provide 
sufficient opportunities for 
practice when new skills are 
initially introduced?
b) Does the program provide 
opportunities for cumulative 
review?
The steps in the recommended strat­
egy are not clearly outlined.
The strategy applies only to a limited 
type of example; the strategy is too 
broad and not specific enough to 
apply or too narrow and applies to a 
limited type of example.
The preskills are neither clearly identified 
nor taught.
Only a few examples are used to 
introduce a strategy.
The practice examples represent only 
the newly introduced problem type.
Program includes limited numbers 
of examples when new skills are 
introduced.
Once a unit is complete, little 
cumulative review is provided.
Choose explicit instructional strategies 
from the teaching formats available in 
the related chapter.
Analyze the examples for which the 
strategy applies and decide whether it 
is worthwhile to present to students. If 
not, choose alternate strategies from 
the related chapter.
Outline the steps in the available strat­
egy. Using that outline, determine 
where (or whether) the preskills required 
for that strategy are introduced.
Supplement preskill instruction when 
necessary.
Add practice examples to ensure 
student mastery on the strategy.
After students master a new strategy, 
provide discrimination practice that 
involves working related problems, for 
example, working subtractions prob­
lems with and without renaming.
Provide additional examples on the 
newly introduced skill for students to 
practice.
Provide distributed practice by includ­
ing practice on the skills introduced in 
that unit across the grade level.

[p.24]
24 Part I Perspective
Some features of the math instruction in commercial programs may be easier to modify 
than others. For example, the instructional strategies in a given program may be well designed, 
but the program may fail to provide sufficient practice and review opportunities. In that case, 
the modification is simply for teachers to supplement the programs by adding more practice 
examples during initial instruction (massed practice), then building in more systematic review 
throughout (cumulative review). In contrast, if a commercial program is fragmented and lacks 
strategic integration of critical skills and concepts, then curriculum modification will be onerous 
and time-consuming.
Table 3.3 on the previous page is based on the evaluation criteria outlined previously in 
Table 3.2 and is designed to address insufficiencies identified through the evaluation process. 
This table focuses not on the presence or absence of critical instructional design features but on 
the recommendations for modification that the evaluation questions suggest. For example, if an 
evaluator finds that the program being evaluated has not identified and/or taught the preskills 
required for a particular instructional strategy, the recommendation would be to identify those 
preskills and teach them prior to introducing the strategy. Following each evaluation question on 
Table 3.3, we have presented potential problems and suggested general modifications.
Importantly, we wrote this text to serve as a resource for the modification of commer­
cial programs. Chapters 4-18 are organized to permit teachers to access explicit strategies 
accompanied by specific teaching procedures. Additionally, the chapters identify the preskills 
corresponding to those strategies and provide detailed guidelines for selecting appropriate 
examples for instruction. Finally, the text provides specific recommendations for designing 
high-quality practice and review.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. How was the Mathematics Curriculum Framework, presented in this chapter, derived?
2. What are some critical features of a well-designed curriculum adoption process?
3. Describe the evaluation criteria represented in the Mathematics Curriculum Framework.
4. How can this text be used to modify existing math instruction?