[p.201]
Chapter
11
Problem Solving
LEARNING OUTCOMES
11.1 Discuss the recommended sequence for introducing word problems and the 
rationale for that sequence.
11.2 Describe the introductory strategy for teaching students to solve basic addition 
and subtractions problems.
11.3 Outline the number-family instructional strategies recommended to teach 
students to solve addition/subtraction word problems.
11.4 Discuss the differences in the instructional strategies for teaching addition/ 
subtraction word problems and multiplication/di vision word problems.
11.5 Describe the common types of errors students make when solving word 
problems.
SKILL HIERARCHY
∙∙∙∙∙∙..
This chapter discusses procedures for teaching students to apply the four basic operations (addi­
tion, subtraction, multiplication, and division) to word problems that present situations requiring 
a mathematical solution. Procedures for teaching problem-solving strategies that include frac­
tions, percent, decimals, time, money, and measurement are addressed in later chapters on those 
topics. In this chapter, addition and subtraction word problems are introduced together to pro­
vide discrimination practice. Multiplication and division word problems are taught together for 
the same reason. Multiplication and division word problems are introduced as soon as students 
have mastered previously introduced types of word problems (problems involving addition and 
subtraction) and have been taught to solve multiplication and division computation problems. It 
is important for students to work mixed sets of word problems involving all four operations once 
multiplication and division problems have been introduced to continue providing practice choos­
ing the correct operation to solve the problem.
Addition and subtraction problems are usually introduced in late first grade. Analysis of 
addition and subtraction problems in commercial mathematics programs reveals three primary 
types of problem: temporal sequence problems, comparison problems, and classification prob­
lems. Simple versions of these three types of one-step problems are usually introduced by the 
end of second grade. Both initial and more sophisticated strategies for solving these problem 
types are introduced in this chapter.

[p.202]
202 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Multiplication and division problems are usually introduced during third grade. Initially, the 
multiplication or division operation is signaled by the presence of the word “each” or “every.” 
Later, the words “a” and “per” serve as signals for multiplication or division (“The crew works 
7 hours a day,” “There are 6 crayons per box”). Multiplication and division problems that do not 
contain key words are obviously more difficult. See the Instructional Sequence and Assessment 
Chart for a recommended sequence for introducing word problems.
Within the two basic groupings of word problems are problems with large numbers, multi- 
step problems, and problems with distractors. Problems with larger numbers are usually more 
difficult because the computation is more difficult and the operation required is often less obvi­
ous. Multi-step problems usually appear in third grade and require students to perform two or 
more steps, usually involving two or more different operations, to solve the problem. The sim­
plest type of multi-step problem involves adding three numbers. Multi-step problems become 
more difficult as the number and type of computations required increase. The third type of these 
more difficult word problems contains irrelevant quantities or information that may distract stu­
dents from the necessary steps to solve the problem. More information about these three prob­
lem types is presented later in the chapter.
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
1-2 Addition/subtraction simple action 
problems with key words
Deshawn had 7 apples. He got 3 more from the store. How 
many apples does he have in all?
Lisa had some apples. She bought 3 more. She ended up with 
12 apples. How many apples did she start with?
2 Addition/subtraction temporal sequence 
problems
Carlos had 7 apples. He gave 3 to his sister. How many does 
he have left?
2 Addition/subtraction comparison 
problems
Bill is 7 years old. Alice is 5 years old. How much older is Bill?
Hole A is 5 feet deep. Hole B is 7 feet deeper than Hole A.
How deep is Hole B?
Hole A is 5 feet deep. Hole B is 7 feet deep. How much deeper 
is Hole B?
2 Addition/subtraction classification 
problems
Eight men are in the store. Three women are in the store. How 
many people are in the store?
Ramona has 4 hats; 3 of the hats are blue. How many hats are 
not blue?
Maria sold 5 hats in the morning. She sold 2 hats in the 
afternoon. How many hats did she sell?
2 Multi-step problems: add three numerals LaToya ran 5 miles on Monday, 3 miles on Tuesday, and 4 miles 
on Wednesday. How many miles did he run altogether?
3 Multiplication/division problems with the 
word "each" or "every"
Marcus has 4 boxes. In each box there are 6 pencils. How 
many pencils does Marcus have?
Tamara jogs 5 miles every day. How far will she jog in 3 days?
There are 20 students. The teacher wants to divide them into 
4 equal groups. How many students will be in each group?
3 Multiplication/division problems with the 
word "per" or a phrase using "a"
The ABC Company makes pens. They put 5 pens in a box. 
How many pens are in 3 boxes?
Rosa runs 2 miles per day. How many days will it take her to 
run 8 miles?

[p.203]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 203
3 Addition/subtraction problems with larger
numerals
3 Multiplication/division problems with
larger numerals
3 Addition/subtraction problems with
distractors
4 Division and multiplication problems with
larger numerals (two-digit divisor or 
multi-digit factors)
4 Multi-step problems: three numerals; the
sum of two numerals is subtracted from 
the third numeral
4 Three numerals: two quantities are
multiplied; the product is added or 
subtracted from a third numeral
4 Three numerals: two quantities are added;
the sum is divided or multiplied
5 Four numerals: two sets of quantities are
multiplied; the product of each is added
5 Five numerals: two sets of quantities are
multiplied; the product of each is added; 
the sum is subtracted or added to a given 
quantity
Travis ran 214 miles in January and 158 miles in February. How 
many more miles did he run in January?
There are 153 students in the school. If there are 61 girls in the 
school, how many boys are there?
There are 35 students in every class. There are 5 classes in the 
school. How many students are in the school?
Jean worked 2 days. If she makes $16 a day, how much did 
she make?
Jill has 215 pencils. She wants to make bundles with 5 pencils 
in each bundle. How many bundles can she make?
There are 20 blue pencils, 5 red pencils, and 16 yellow pens in 
a bag. How many pencils are in the bag?
Bill weighed 120 pounds. He ran 5 miles. Now he weighs 
117 pounds. How much did he lose?
Bill had 12 hats; 5 hats were old. He gave away 3 old hats. 
How many hats does he have left?
Sarah wants to save $385. If she puts $35 in the bank each 
month, how many months will it take her to save the $385?
A factory produces 325 cars a day. How many cars will it 
produce in 25 days?
A pound of apples costs 60^. How much will 20 pounds of 
apples cost?
Julie sold 12 pencils in the morning. Ann sold 15 in the 
afternoon. How many more must they sell before they've sold 
50 altogether?
Timmy weighed 84 pounds. He lost 4 pounds in May and 
7 pounds in June. How much did he weigh at the end of June?
Jean sold 10 pens in the morning. She began with 18. If she 
sells 2 more, how many will she have left?
Tom has 3 pens in each pocket. He has 5 pockets. Ann has 
16 pens. Who has more pens? How many more?
Ann has $7. If she works 4 hours and earns $3 each hour, how 
many dollars will she have at the end of the day?
There are 10 boys and 20 girls in the class. Each row can sit 
5 students. How many rows will there be?
Jill earns $2 every morning and $4 every afternoon. How 
much will she earn in 6 days?
Pam ran 5 miles a day for 3 days and 6 miles a day for 2 days. 
How many miles did she run altogether?
Tammy bought 3 cakes and 2 drinks. A cake cost 10¢. A drink 
cost 15c How much did Tammy spend?
Bill needs $30. He worked 5 hours on Monday for $2 an hour. 
He worked 2 hours on Tuesday for $3 an hour. How much 
more money does he need?
Bill weighed 135 pounds in May. He gained 3 pounds each 
month for the next 2 months. Then he gained 5 pounds each 
month for the next 3 months. How much does he weigh now?

[p.204]
204 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Teachers also should be aware that word problems become more difficult as the problems 
include unfamiliar vocabulary and use more complex syntax. The two problems that follow 
illustrate the importance of vocabulary and syntax:
a. Antonio wrote 6 sentences. The teacher crossed out 2 of them. How many are left?
b. When the teacher read Ariana’s paper, she deleted 15 sentences and 3 commas. She had 
initially written 52 sentences. How many sentences did she have at the end?
Both of these word problems are temporal sequence problems—problems that state the original 
amount and the amount of decrease. Problem b is more difficult for several reasons. First, prob­
lem b contains more difficult vocabulary. Students may not be familiar with the words “deleted” 
and “initially.” If a student does not understand “deleted,” she has no basis for solving the prob­
lem. Second, the amount that Antonio began with is stated first in problem a, but in problem 
b the amount Ariana began with is stated after the amount of the decrease. When the smaller 
numeral appears first, students are more likely to add. The third difficulty is the presence of the 
phrase “and 3 commas,” a distractor that must be ignored. Finally, the numerals in problem b are 
larger, and the operation requires renaming. Understanding the features that make word prob­
lems more challenging helps teachers better prepare students for a variety of word problems.
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING
We support the use of activity-based strategies as an introduction to the concepts in word prob­
lems rather than the primary strategy for solving them, unlike many current approaches to math­
ematics instruction. For example, commercial programs often suggest that students solve word 
problems by using manipulatives or pictures to represent values or by working with their peers 
to act out the word problem. These activity-based approaches fail to demonstrate clear connec­
tions between the activities, the language of the word problems, and the procedures required to 
solve the problems. In addition, these activities are not an efficient use of instructional time. In 
this chapter, we present generalizable problem-solving strategies that are useful and efficient. 
Embedded in these strategies is instruction that addresses critical language concepts needed to 
express word problems numerically. As a result, the strategies included in this text demonstrate 
clear connections between the language of the problems and the mathematical procedures used 
to solve them.
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: ADDITION AND
SUBTRACTION PROBLEMS
• ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
The procedures for teaching addition and subtraction problems are divided into two parts. The 
first part introduces the concept of word problems to young students through the use of illus­
trations. The second part teaches a more generalizable problem-solving strategy that enables 
students to solve temporal sequence, comparison, and classification problems. The generalizable 
strategy addresses the difficulties caused by variations in word usage. The same verb (gave 
away) appears in examples a and b below. However, solving problem a requires addition while 
solving problem b requires subtraction.
a. Nicole gave away 7 stickers. Maria gave away 3 more stickers than Nicole. How many 
stickers did Maria give away?
b. Nicole had 15 stickers. Then she gave away 7 stickers. How many stickers does she have 
now?
Introducing the Concept
In first grade, word problems can be introduced when students can work a page of simple addi­
tion and subtraction problems, using a line-drawing strategy, with 80% to 90% accuracy. It is not 
necessary for students to know how to solve missing-addend problems or have any basic facts 
memorized in order to be introduced to word problems.

[p.205]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 205
About 3 weeks prior to the introduction of word problems, the teacher would present a 
preskill format designed to teach students how to translate to symbols four key phrases: “get 
more,” “get rid of,” “end with,” and “how many.” The phrase “get more” translates to a plus 
sign, “get rid of’ to a minus sign, “end with” to an equal sign, and “how many” to an empty 
box. The teacher would say each new phrase and tell students its translation. For example, the 
teacher might say, “Listen: When you get more, you write a plus sign. What do you write for 
get more?” Each second or third day, the teacher would introduce a new phrase and review the 
phrases introduced earlier.
After the students know these four terms, the teacher presents another preskill exercise in 
which she says a common verb and asks if the verb translates to a plus or a minus sign. Several 
common verbs should be presented, for example, “buys,” “loses,” “sells,” “eats,” “finds,” “gives 
away,” “breaks,” and “makes.” The teacher associates each verb with getting more or getting rid 
of before asking the students to translate the verb to a symbol. For example, the teacher asks, 
“When you buy something, do you get more or get rid of something? So when you buy some­
thing, do you plus or minus?”
Format 11.1: Introducing Problem Solving Concepts is presented when the students 
have mastered the preskills outlined above. The format includes two parts. In Part A, the teacher 
begins word problem instruction by demonstrating how a written or verbal word problem can 
be solved with semi-concrete objects (pictures or lines). For example, pictures could be used to 
illustrate the following problem: There were six children. Two children went home. How many 
were left? The teacher would draw 6 lines representing children and cross out 2 of the lines to 
represent the 2 children who went home. The remaining lines would be counted to determine the 
answer.
After demonstrating how a verbal or written word problem can be illustrated, the teacher 
demonstrates how a verbal or written word problem may be expressed numerically, translating it 
phrase by phrase into an equation.
There were six children. 6
Two children went home. 6 — 2
How many were left? 6 — 2 = □
In Part B, the structured worksheet exercise, the teacher gives students a worksheet with a 
set of problems. If the students do not have adequate decoding skills, the teacher should read the 
problems to them. The teacher has the students read the entire problem and then reread it phrase 
by phrase. After reading each phrase, students are directed to draw the appropriate picture. For 
example, after reading “Ann has seven apples,” students draw pictures of seven apples. Then 
students read the problem again, phrase by phrase, and write the appropriate equation. After 
completing the equation, students figure out the answer by counting the pictures or lines.
Example selection for word problems is very important. The verbs in the problems should 
be fairly common terms such as “buy,” “give away,” “make,” “break,” “find,” and “lose.” Also, 
problems should contain words that the students are able to decode, and the problems initially 
should be relatively short. A random mix of addition and subtraction problems should be used so 
that students must discriminate between the two types of problems.
For the first several weeks, the last sentence in word problems should say, “ends with how 
many?” These words can be translated directly to the symbols = □. After several weeks, the 
questions can be phrased differently, such as, “How many does she have now?” and “How many 
does she have in all?” The teacher explains that these sentences mean the same as “ends with 
how many?” and can be translated into the symbols — □.
A Number-Family Problem-Solving Strategy
The introductory strategy of translating word problems phrase by phrase into an equation is used 
to demonstrate the relationship between words and equations representing everyday situations. 
Most word problems, however, cannot be translated phrase by phrase into an equation. There­
fore, we recommend teaching a strategy that encourages students to integrate their knowledge 
of fact-number-family concepts (see Chapter 6) with basic language skills to solve temporal 
sequencing, comparison, and classification problems.

[p.206]
206 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
The number-family strategy is based on the concept that three numbers can be used to 
form four math statements. For example, the numbers 2, 5, and 7 yield 2 + 5 = 7, 5 + 2 = 7, 
7 — 5 = 2, and 7 — 2 = 5. The numbers may be represented as the following number-family 
diagram:
2 5 7
A standard diagram is used to represent a number family. When using the number-family strat­
egy to solve basic facts, students are taught that the big number (total) goes at the end of the 
arrow. If the big number is not known, a box goes at the end of the number-family arrow. In a 
typical problem, two of the numbers in the family are provided. Students place these numerals 
where they belong in the family and then determine whether the missing numeral is obtained by 
adding or subtracting. For example, the family 
2 5
does not give the total and yields the problem 2 + 5 = I I.
2
'7
In the above diagram, the family does give the total, so it yields the problem 7 — 2 = I I.
The key to applying the number-family analysis successfully to a range of problem types is 
the ability to analyze the language in the problem to determine the name for the total. For exam­
ple, in a problem involving boys, girls, and children, the name for the total is children. If the 
problem gives a number for children, subtraction is required. If the total number of children is 
unknown, addition is required. Students first represent the analysis of the problem in a diagram 
and then use the diagram to determine the operation. Consider the following problem: There are 
8 children at the party. Three are boys. How many girls are at the party? The number for chil­
dren is given.
children 
8
and generates the subtraction problem 8 — 3 = I I.
Conversely, when the following problem is presented: There are 8 girls and 3 boys at the 
party. How many children are at the party? The total number of children is not given; therefore, 
the number-family representation is
children
8
The analysis generates an addition problem.
8 + 3 = □.
The number-family analysis highlights the relationships between the concepts in the word 
problem and the values that are given. Very careful guided practice is required to teach students 
to use the language in a word problem to determine whether the total number is given. The anal­
ysis for each problem type is explained in detail later in this chapter.
Preskill for the Number-Family Strategy An essential preskill for the number-family 
word problem strategy is figuring out the missing number when two of the three numbers in a 
fact family are given. Students are taught that if the total number is given,
4 ∏9

[p.207]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 207
they subtract to find the missing number:
9-4 = □
On the other hand, if the total number is not given,
they add the two given numbers:
4 + 9 = □
Note that prior to introducing this strategy, students should be able to compute some facts men­
tally rather than using lines and subsequent problems should include only the basic facts that 
students previously have mastered.
Format 11.2: Preskill: Fact Family—Finding the Missing Family Member intro­
duces this preskill. This preskill should be taught approximately 2 or 3 weeks before temporal 
sequence problems are first introduced, typically sometime during second grade. Note that this 
format is similar to those used in Chapter 6 to teach basic facts. In that chapter, the phrases “big 
numbers” and “small numbers” were used. Those phrases can be replaced by the phrases “total 
number” and “parts of the total” when preparing students to solve word problems to prevent 
students from identifying the larger number as the “big” number.
When presenting the preskill diagrams, the teacher shows an arrow with two numerals and 
a box. Below are examples of the diagrams. In problem a, the total number is given, while in 
problem b, the total number is not given. The line below the diagram is for writing the equation 
to find the missing number.
a. 6 *8 b. 6
Format 11.2 has four parts. Part A introduces the rule about what to do when the total number 
is given: When the total number is given, we subtract. After telling students the rule, the teacher 
demonstrates its application, writing on the board a diagram in which the total number is given:
8-2 = 6
The teacher points out that because the total number is given, the students must subtract to 
figure out the missing number (8 — 2 = 6). And when they subtract, they must start with the 
total number.
Part B introduces the rule about what to do when the total number is not given: When the 
total number is not given, we add. After telling students the rule, the teacher demonstrates its 
application, writing on the board a diagram in which the total number is not given:
7—>
3 + 7
The teacher points out that because the total number is not given, the two given numbers must be 
added to figure out the total number (3 + 7 = 10).
Part C is a structured worksheet with diagrams, half of which give the total number and half 
of which do not. The student’s task is to write the appropriate equation on the line under each 
arrow and to figure out the missing number.
b. 4 2

[p.208]
208 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
TABLE 11.1 Temporal Sequence Problems
• Verb indicates ending up with more.
Addition
a. James had 12 apples. He bought 17 more apples. How many apples did he end up 
with?
Subtraction
b. James had 12 apples. He bought more apples. Now he has 17 apples. How many apples 
did he buy?
• Verb indicates ending up with less
Addition
c. James had lots of apples. He sold 17 of the apples. He ended up with 12 apples. How 
many apples did he start with?
Subtraction
d. James had 17 apples. He sold 12 apples. How many apples did he end up with?
Part D is a less structured worksheet exercise in which the teacher asks students whether 
they add or subtract and then has them work the problem. In Parts C and D, the problems should 
not be written in a predictable order. Addition and subtraction problems should appear randomly.
Temporal Sequence Problems
In temporal sequence problems, a person starts out with a specified quantity, and then an 
action occurs (finds, loses, buys, sells) that results in the person ending up with more or less. 
The problems in Table 11.1 illustrate why students cannot rely solely on the verb to deter­
mine the appropriate operation. Even though the presence of verbs such as “buys,” “gets,” and 
“finds” often indicates addition, some problem containing those words will require subtraction. 
Conversely, some word problems contain verbs that usually indicate subtraction but are solved 
with addition.
The strategy presented in the format for temporal sequence problems teaches the students 
to begin by looking at the overall structure of the word problem. Students then apply a two-step 
strategy for solving the problem. First, they determine whether the person in the problem starts 
or ends with the total. If the verb implies that the person ends with more, the person ends with 
the total. This is the case with the first two problems in Table 11.1: James buys more apples so 
he ends with the total. Students label the total accordingly:
___________ Ends
Next, the students determine whether the total is given (Do we know how many James ends 
with?). In problem a, we do not know the total; we are asked how many James ends up with:
Ends
The two numbers given are recorded as parts:
12 17 Ends
------------->
Finally, students add to find the total. In problem b, the same diagram is used. Since James is 
buying apples, he ends with the total:
Ends

[p.209]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 209
In problem b, however, the total is given. We know James ends up with 17 apples:
Ends 
17
The total is given, so we must subtract to find how many he buys:
∣—। Ends 
12 LJ 17
For problems c and d in Table 11.1, James sells apples. He ends up with fewer apples, so he 
starts with the total:
Starts
Next, we determine if the total is given (Do we know how many he starts with?). Problem c asks 
how many he starts with. The total is not given, so we add:
Starts
17
For problem d, we know James starts with 17:
Starts 
17
The total is given so we subtract:
12
Starts 
17
All temporal sequence problems are analyzed successfully using two questions: Do we start or 
end with the total? Is that total given? The steps to analyzing temporal sequence problems are 
outlined in Summary Box 11.1. Students must be familiar with the number-family rules pre­
sented in Format 11.2: Preskill: Fact Family—Finding the Missing Family Member to be 
successful in applying this strategy to problem solving.
Format 11.3: Temporal Sequence Word Problems outlines the procedure for teaching 
students to work this type of problem. Part A is a verbal exercise to establish the relationship 
between various verbs (“buys,” “gives away,” “loses”) and a person starting or ending with 
more. Part B is a structured board presentation in which the teacher guides students through the
SUMMARY BOX 11.1
Temporal Sequence Word Problems
1. Students read the problem and determine whether 
the person starts or ends with more.
2. Students draw a number-family diagram and label 
starts or ends as the total.
3. Students fill in number-family diagram with labels 
and numbers that are given in the problem.
4. Students use number-family strategy to 
determine whether to add or subtract to find 
the unknown number.
Sam began with $25 in his savings 
account. He put another $4 into the 
account. How much money has he saved?
ENDS
ENDS
δ ENDS

[p.210]
210 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
problems. First, students determine whether the person in the problem starts or ends with more 
(the total). Next, they figure out whether the total is given. The teacher then places the values 
given in the problem on the number-family diagram. After the values are in place along the 
arrow, students apply their knowledge of the number-family rule: If the total, or big number, is 
missing, you add. If a small number is missing, you subtract.
Part C, introduced when students have mastered the steps in Part B, is a structured work­
sheet exercise. The teacher leads students through the same strategy, but the students construct 
the number-family diagrams that determine the correct operation. Part D is a less structured 
worksheet exercise in which the teacher asks the students to indicate if the person starts or ends 
with more (the total) and then has students complete the number-family diagram and figure out 
the answer.
When selecting examples for this format, the teacher constructs a minimum of two sets 
of four problems. Each set should contain two addition and two subtraction problems. In one 
addition problem, the person would start with more; in one addition problem, the person would 
end with more. Likewise, in one subtraction problem, the person would start with more, and in 
one subtraction problem, the person would end with more. The problems should be written in 
random order. Problems introduced initially should contain common verbs. Sentences should 
be relatively simple. All of the problems should result in equations that the students are able to 
work. For example, if students have not learned to regroup, subtraction problems should be lim­
ited to problems that do not require regrouping.
Comparison Problems
A comparison problem addresses two quantities and the difference between them. There are two 
basic types of comparison problems. In one type, a quantity is stated describing an attribute of 
an object or person, such as weight, length, height, or age. The difference between the objects or 
people is also stated. For example, “Brendan is 7 years old. Colleen is 3 years older.” The stu­
dent is asked to find the quantity of the other person or object: “How old is Colleen?”
In the second type of problem, the quantities of two objects or people are stated and the student 
is asked to find the difference between them: “Brendan is 7 years old. Colleen is 10 years old. How 
much older is Colleen?” Both types of comparison problems are introduced concurrently. All com­
parison problems can be solved using a number-family analysis. The larger of the quantities being 
compared represents the total. The smaller quantity and the difference are the parts of the total.
The two-step strategy for solving comparison problems is similar to that introduced for 
temporal sequence problems. It involves (a) determining which person or object represents the 
larger quantity and (b) determining whether the larger quantity is given or not given. For exam­
ple, “Alicia got 10 problems correct. Asher got 2 fewer problems correct than Alicia. How many 
problems did Asher get correct?” In this problem, the number of problems Asher answered cor­
rectly is fewer, so the number of problems answered correctly by Alicia represents the total. 
Because the number of problems Alicia answered correctly is given, the problem requires sub­
traction. The steps to solving comparison problems are outlined in Summary Box 11.2.
SUMMARY j BOX 11.2
Problem-Solving Strategy for Comparison Problems
1. Students read the problem and determine the 
bigger number.
2. Students fill in the number-family diagram with the 
label in the place for total
3. Students complete the diagram by filling in known 
values.
4. Students use number-family strategy to determine 
whether to add or subtract.
Diane runs 3 miles each day. Mark runs 
2 miles more each day. How many miles 
does Mark run each day?
- Mark

[p.211]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 211
Format 11.4: Comparison Problems shows how to present this type of problem. The for­
mat includes three parts. Part A is a preskill format designed to teach students how to determine 
the name for the bigger number. Note that this part assumes that students understand compara­
tive words such as “deeper,” “shallower,” “thicker,” “thinner,” “bigger,” “smaller,” “heavier,” 
and “lighter.” Students who have difficulty with Part A may not understand the meaning of the 
comparatives. Teachers could test students’ understanding of the language with diagrams or 
illustrations. For example, the teacher could present illustrations of two holes and ask, “Show 
me the hole that is deeper.”
Another useful strategy for helping students determine which object is greater is to practice 
with sentences that compare two things without numerical values. For example,
a. The lake is closer than the city.
b. Brad worked longer than Rian did.
c. The bird stored fewer nuts than the raccoon.
Students would write partial number families for these sentences, writing the name for the 
larger quantity at the end of the number-family arrow. For example, in sentence a, the lake is closer 
than the city, so the city must be the larger value. Students would write the following number family:
City
After students master placing the name correctly in the number family, they can be taught to 
place the numerals in a comparison problem on the number-family arrow. Part B is a structured 
worksheet exercise with complete word problems. The teacher leads the students in applying the 
two-step strategy, first writing the name for the total and then writing a box or a quantity given 
for the total. For the problem “The lake is 23 miles closer than the city. The city is 59 miles 
away. How far away is the lake?” the students first write “city” for the total and then, since the 
quantity for city is given, write “59” under city. The students write the other quantity and a box 
for the small numbers on the number-family arrow.
Because the total is given in the number family, the number sentence is written:
The critical step in Part B occurs when the teacher asks if the problem gives a number for the 
total. If students do not read the problem carefully they may give a wrong answer. For example, 
if a problem states that Rachel is 12 years older than Sally, who is 7 years old, the total will tell 
how old Rachel is. When examining the problem, the students may misread the words “Rachel is 
12 years older” as “Rachel is 12 years old” and write 12 as the total number.
If this type of error occurs frequently, the teacher would do a practice exercise that focuses 
only on this step. The teacher would present a series of problems verbally. For each problem, the 
teacher would tell the students what the total number tells about and would ask if the problem gives 
a numeral for the total. For example, “The total number tells how old Rachel is. Does a numeral 
in the problem tell how old Rachel is?” Six to eight problems would be presented in the exercise.
Part C is a less structured worksheet exercise in which the teacher leads students in applying 
the strategy. Each example set should include the following types of examples to provide dis­
crimination practice.
1. Two addition problems in which one quantity is stated. The difference indicates the other 
quantity is greater:
Bill dug a hole 6 feet deep. Trey dug a hole 2 feet deeper than Bill’s hole. How deep is 
the hole Trey dug?
Bill dug a hole 6 feet deep. Bill’s hole is 2 feet shallower than the hole Trey dug. How 
deep is the hole Trey dug?

[p.212]
212 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
2. One subtraction problem in which one quantity is stated. The difference indicates the other 
quantity is smaller:
Bob dug a hole 6 feet deep. Jermaine dug a hole 2 feet shallower than Bob’s hole. How 
deep is the hole Jermaine dug?
3. One subtraction problem in which both quantities are stated. Students must determine the 
difference.
Janet dug a hole 6 feet deep. Michael dug a hole 2 feet deep. How much deeper is Janet’s 
hole?
Two addition problems would be included in each set to provide an equal mix of addition and 
subtraction problems.
Classification Problems
The steps for teaching students to work classification problems are outlined in Summary 
Box 11.3 and Format 11.5: Classification Word Problems. Part A provides practice in the 
language preskill of identifying class names for groups of objects. The teacher says a superordinate 
class and two related subclasses and asks the students to tell which is the biggest class. This exer­
cise assumes that students have already mastered the language related to classification. Teachers 
working with naive students may find that more extensive teaching in this skill is necessary.
In Part B, a structured worksheet exercise, the teacher introduces classification word prob­
lems. Students are given a worksheet with six to eight problems. Part B begins with the teacher 
reviewing with students that when the total number in a number family is given, they must 
subtract to find the answer; when the total number is not given, they must add. The teacher then 
states a problem and identifies the three groups mentioned in the problem: “There are eight 
children. Three are boys. How many are girls? This problem is about children, boys, and girls.” 
After telling students the three groups, the teacher asks which word tells about the big class in 
this problem. Students are directed to write the word “children” at the end of the arrow to indi­
cate the big class that the word problem is talking about.
Children
As with the comparison and temporal sequence word problems, students next determine whether 
the numeral for the total is given. In this example, the number family is completed as follows:
Children 
8
SUMMARY. BOX 11.3
Classification Problem-Solving Strategy
1. Students read the problem and underline the classes. Jose has 3 soccer balls and 4 baseballs. 
How many balls does Jose have?
2. Students write the biggest class in the area for total 
number.
Balls
3. Students write the values for the two smaller classes, 
if known, in the number-family diagram.
4. Students use the number-family strategy to determine 
whether to add or subtract.
3 4 Balls
----------------- >
3 4 Balls
----------------- >7

[p.213]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 213
Students apply the number-family rule, and since a small number is missing, they subtract to 
find the number of girls:
8-3 = 5 girls
Part C is a less structured worksheet exercise. After reading a problem, the students write 
the name of the big class at the end of the number-family line above the place for the total. They 
reread the problem to figure out whether the total is given and then complete the number-family 
diagram. They are then able to apply the rules to solve the problem.
Several example selection guidelines need to be considered. First, practice examples should 
include an equal mix of addition and subtraction problems. Second, problems initially should be 
written in a relatively short form with few extraneous words. Third, relatively common classes 
should be used. A sample set of four problems appears below:
a. There were 75 cars in all. 15 were green cars. The rest were red cars. How many red cars 
were there?
b. Lauren had red marbles and blue marbles. She had 23 red marbles and 16 blue marbles. 
How many marbles did she have in all?
c. Tomas collected toy cars and airplanes. He had 43 toys in his collection. 14 were cars. How 
many were airplanes?
d. At Central Avenue School, there are 16 girls and 15 boys in first grade. How many children 
are in first grade?
During the first week that classification problems are introduced, the key words in the prob­
lem can be underlined to prompt the students to attend to the class names. For example, in prob­
lem a above, the words “cars,” “red,” and “green” would be underlined.
While students are learning to solve classification problems, they should continue to solve 
temporal sequence and comparison problems. After they have mastered classification problems, 
the teacher would give students worksheets that include a mix of classification, comparison, 
and temporal sequence problems. Worksheets would still include six to nine problems, with 
one-third representing each type of problem. When students first encounter a mix of problems, 
teachers would read the problems with the students and guide the students in setting up the num­
ber-family diagrams. Even though students have been successful at solving temporal sequence, 
comparison, and classification problems when presented independently, teachers should not 
assume students will be equally successful when two or three types of problems are combined 
on the same worksheet.
©
Format 11.6A/B:
Using Tables to Solve 
Problems
Watch how Tristan maintains a 
brisk pace.
£ Format 11.6C: Using 
Tables to Solve 
Problems
Watch how Tristan uses think 
time.
Reading Tables Table problems are an efficient way to present sets of data and reinforce 
logic skills and number families. Format 11.6: Using Tables to Solve Problems introduces stu­
dents to the idea that values in rows and columns are added to obtain totals. To find the total for 
a row or column, students use a running total. In a beginning table exercise, students learn that 
columns run vertically and rows horizontally. After students have sufficient practice adding both 
columns and rows of numerals in tables, headings are presented. These headings tell about the 
numerals in the columns and rows. For example,
Hours Worked
Mon. Tues. Weds. Total
Josh 5 4 10 19
Jane 4 7 1 12
John 2 5 3 10
Total 11 16 14

[p.214]
214 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Students practice touching both headings and finding a particular cell. For example, stu­
dents place one finger on “Tuesday” and move downward and another finger on “John” and 
move across until they meet at 5. After working with several examples, students should be ready 
to answer questions about a numeral in a particular cell, such as “How many hours did Jane 
work on Wednesday?” “Who worked the most hours on Tuesday?” “Who worked the most 
hours in all?”
After students are familiar with reading tables and adding numerals in rows and columns, 
the teacher can demonstrate how to apply the number-family strategy to solving problems in 
tables. Students first are introduced to the concept that tables with rows and columns can work 
like number families. Instead of just a line between the cells, the tables in the early problems 
should have arrows. The arrows remind the students that each row works like a number family. 
The first two numerals in the row represent small numbers. The total is the big number.
A small number is missing in row a. Students apply the number-family rule: If the 
small number is missing, you subtract. If the big number is missing, you add. Since a small 
number is missing in this example, students subtract to find the missing number in the row 
(52 — 27 = 25). In row b, a big number is missing, so students add to find the missing number 
in the family and write it in the table: 12 + 13 = 25.
Teachers may want to separate the introduction of the number family in rows and the num­
ber family in columns, first working only with rows, then only with columns, and finally solving 
for unknown cells in both. The tables below show this progression.
15 35
20 12*
14 26
10 9
r 22 . r 31
19 45
35 50
10 18
The final step involves teaching students how to transfer the information from a word prob­
lem to a table and answer questions. Using tables to work word problems that involve classifi­
cation of data is a natural extension of what students learned when solving addition/subtr action 
classification word problems. The column and row headings show the names for the two sub­
classes (boys and girls) as well as the name for the big class (children). For example, the table 
might show the number of girls and boys attending soccer practice on two days, Tuesday and 
Thursday. The table for recording the data would look like this:
Format 11.6D: Using 
Tables to Solve
Problems
Watch how Tristan monitors 
his students as they complete a 
worksheet using a table to solve 
a classification word problem.
Tuesday 
Thursday 
Total
Part D illustrates how teachers can teach students to record data, use the number-family 
strategy to complete the table, and then answer questions using the information from the table. 
Note that teaching all parts of Format 11.6 will take a considerable amount of time and will 
occur over many days. Teaching students to use tables, however, is an efficient and logical 
approach to solving several types of problems.

[p.215]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 215
Distractors
A distractor is information given in a word problem that is irrelevant to finding the solution to 
the problem. It is called a distractor because students have been accustomed to using all of the 
information that a problem provides, and the additional information may distract them from 
determining the correct equation. For example,
Natasha had 4 stuffed dogs, 2 stuffed rabbits, 2 stuffed pigs, and 5 stuffed cats in her collec­
tion. Four of the stuffed animals are very old. How many stuffed animals does Natasha have 
in her collection?
Because the problem asks how many stuffed animals Natasha has in her collection, the irrelevant 
information is about the number of old animals and must be ignored in order to solve the prob­
lem correctly.
Students are most often introduced to problems with distractors in intermediate grades. 
Several practice problems would be given in which students state what they have been asked 
to solve and cross out the information that they don’t need in order to solve the problem. 
Problems with distractors would be distributed throughout the math curriculum and practiced 
frequently until students can easily discern the relevant information when solving a problem.
Multi-step Word Problems
Frequently, students work temporal problems that require both addition and subtraction. 
These multi-step problems can be solved using number families. Here is an example of such 
a problem:
Shane spends $12 on stamps. Then he spends $32 on a video game. If he ends up with $6, 
how much did he start out with?
Because this problem contains the word “spends,” students may be likely to use only subtraction 
to solve the problem. Using a number-family analysis guards against this kind of mistake.
Format 11.7: Introducing Multi-step Word Problems is an adaptation of the addition/ 
subtraction number-family strategy that can be used to solve this type of problem. In this adapta­
tion, the values in the number family are labeled “in,” “out,” and “end up.” “In” stands for how 
much the person started with and how much more of that item came in. “In” is always the big 
number; “out” and “end up” are the small numbers. “Out” stands for decreases in the items. The 
diagram below illustrates how the problem above can be represented.
End up Out In
6
12
32
44
In applying the number-family strategy, students must add both “out” numbers to find the total 
for “out” before adding that to the “end up” number to arrive at the “in,” or big number (the 
answer to the problem).
To prepare students to work multi-step problems, the teacher can have students practice 
the format with one-step subtraction and addition problems to teach the concepts of “in,” “out,” 
and “end up.” If a sentence tells the amount that somebody has, that is an “in” number. The 
sentence “Caley had $15” gives a numeral for “in.” If a sentence tells about increasing a value, 
it tells about a value for “in.” “McKenzie collected 34 stamps” tells the increase in stamps: 34 is 
the numeral for “in.” Values for “out” tell about reductions. “Howard gave away 3 apples” tells 
about “out”; “1500 gallons leaked out of the tanker” tells about “out.” The value for “end up” 
is the amount that is left, or the difference between the amount “in” and the amount “out.” In 
most problems, the amount for “end up” is the amount the person has after the final reduction or 
increase that the problem describes.

[p.216]
216 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Using simple problems that contain only three values provides practice with the conven­
tions before students are introduced to multi-step problems. Following are examples of simple 
problems that may be used in this type of practice exercise.
a. Maria starts a savings account with $567. Later, she takes some money out of her account, 
which leaves a balance of $329. How much money was taken out?
b. A florist starts out with no carnations. She buys 59 carnations and later sells 47 of them. 
How many carnations did she end up with?
C. Daniel had an empty fruit crate. He put some oranges in the crate. Then he gave away 
23 of those oranges. The crate still has 19 oranges in it. How many oranges did he put in 
the crate?
After students have mastered these conventions, multi-step problems are introduced. These 
problems have more than one value for “in” or more than one value for “out.” The values are 
shown stacked under the appropriate heading in the number family. Following is an example of a 
problem with values stacked under the “in” heading.
Carlos caught 12 salmon yesterday, 11 this morning, and 8 this afternoon. On his way home, 
he stopped at the marketplace and sold some of the salmon. He still has 15 salmon. How 
many did he sell at the marketplace?
End up Out In
15 [j6]
12
11
8
31
After students have mastered multi-step problems with more than one value for either the 
“in” or “out” headings, they are introduced to problems with multiple values for both headings. 
For example,
At the beginning of the workday, the elevator in the Federal Building is empty. Then 5 people 
get on the elevator. It stops at the fifth floor, and 2 more people get on. On the next floor, 
4 people get off. On the seventh floor, 7 people get on, and 8 people get off. How many 
people are still on the elevator?
End up Out In
2
4 5
8 2
7
12 14
INSTRUCTIONAL PROCEDURES: MULTIPLICATION
AND DIVISION PROBLEMS
Multiplication and division operations are used to solve word problems that address equal-sized 
groups. These problems are stated in three basic forms. If a problem gives the number of groups 
and the number in each group, the problem is a multiplication problem; for example, “Malachi 
has 3 piles of toys. There are 2 toys in each pile. How many toys does Malachi have in all?” The 
equation representing that problem is 3 × 2 = □. If the problem gives the total and asks either 
how many groups or how many in each group, the problem is solved with division; for example, 
(a) “Malachi has 6 toys. He puts 2 toys in each pile. How many piles does he end up with?” 
The equation is 6 ÷ 2 = 3; (b) “Malachi has 6 toys. He wants to put the toys in 3 piles with

[p.217]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 217
the same number of toys in each pile. How many toys will he put in each pile?” The equation is 
6 ÷ 3 = 2. Once the students determine that the problem is addressing equal-sized objects or 
groups, they will know that it is either a multiplication or a division problem. Then the students 
can apply the same number-family strategy to determine whether the total number is given and, 
therefore, whether they must multiply or divide to solve the problem.
Multiplication and division problems almost always contain a word or phrase that indi­
cates that the problem is referring to equal-sized groups. Most of the problems contain the word 
“each” or “every.” Other indications of equal-sized groups include the word “per” and phrases 
like “in a box” or “in a dozen”; for example, (a) “Nick walked 4 miles per day. How many miles 
did Nick walk in 3 days?” (b) “There were 3 balls in a box. There were 6 boxes. How many balls 
in all?”
Multiplication and division word problems should not be introduced until students have 
mastered addition and subtraction word problems and have a working knowledge of basic mul­
tiplication and division facts.
Format 11.8: Introduction to Multiplication and Division Word Problems illustrates 
how word problems requiring multiplication and division may be introduced first using coins. 
Given that coins represent equal-sized groups, using coins as a representation for multiplication 
and division problems helps students understand the concepts involved in solving these types of 
word problems.
Initially, students focus on setting up the number families correctly and do not solve the 
problems. The number-family diagrams for this type of problem would consist of three parts: the 
value of the coin, the number of coins, and the total number (cents). The teacher would begin 
by showing students a picture of coins like the one below. Next to the picture would be a num­
ber-family diagram with a C representing the total number of cents, a D representing the number 
of dimes, and a box representing the missing value of one dime.
The students would write the value of a dime in the box.
10 D
----------------->C
The D would be crossed out and the number of dimes written above.
6
10 D
----------------->C
The students would then multiply the value of the dime by the number of dimes to deter­
mine the total number of cents.
The next step in the strategy is to introduce problems in which no coins are shown. For 
example:
a. You have some nickels. You have 45 cents in all. How many nickels do you have?
Nickels 
----------------- > cents
To work problem a, students write the value of each nickel as the first small number and 45 
as the big number for total cents, or cents in all. Since the big number is given, the answer 
is obtained by dividing: 45 ÷ 5 = 9. There are nine nickels.
5 N
----------------- > 45 C
b. You have quarters. You have 5 quarters. How many cents do you have in all?
25 5 Q
----------------->C

[p.218]
218 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
For problem b, the value of a quarter is written as the first small number, and 5 is written 
for the second small number. The number of cents is the total amount (cents) in the number 
family and can be obtained by multiplying 25 × 5.
After students have mastered writing coin problems in number families, they are taught how 
to analyze the language in other multiplication/division problems and create the corresponding 
diagrams. As in addition/subtraction problems, the key to the number-family analysis lies in 
identifying the name for the total. Students are taught that one sentence in each problem tells 
how to draw the number-family diagram. That sentence is the one that tells about each part of 
the number family.
For example, “Each brick weighs 3 pounds.” There are more pounds than bricks, so pounds 
is the name for the total. Brick is a small number. The weight of each brick is the other small 
number.
Initial instruction focuses on generating accurate number-family diagrams. After students master 
how to write the number family, they are asked to solve the problems.
In Part A of Format 11.9: Setting Up Multiplication and Division Word Problems, 
students practice analyzing statements and determining the total, while the teacher demonstrates 
how to draw the number-family diagram. In Part B, students generate number-family diagrams 
and solve written problems in a worksheet format.
Students often have difficulty determining the total number. For the sentence “Each box has 
10 cookies,” the total number is cookies because there are more cookies than boxes. If students 
confuse the total number with size, they will reverse the components. If students have difficulty 
determining the name for the total number, they can be taught that the word in the problem fol­
lowing “each” refers to a small number. If they use the information about “each” in the sentence 
above, they can identify one of the objects as the total number. “Each box has 10 cookies.” The 
word following “each” is box. Box is the small number. The only other name in the sentence is 
cookies, so cookies must be the big number.
DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION
Teachers need to monitor student performance on solving word problems daily. Efforts need to 
be made to determine the possible cause of errors in order to provide appropriate remediation. 
There are at least five possible causes of errors in solving word problems: (a) fact errors, (b) cal­
culation errors, (c) decoding errors, (d) vocabulary errors, and (e) translation errors.
Fact Errors
A fact error occurs when the student chooses the correct operation and writes the problem cor­
rectly but fails to arrive at the correct answer because the student does not know her math facts. 
An example of a fact error follows:
There were 9 boys and 8 girls in the class. How many students were there?
9 + 8 = 16
The equation is written using the correct numerals and the correct operation, but the student 
failed to remember the fact. The remediation process would not require not repetition of word 
problem strategies but instead extra practice on memorization of basic facts.
Calculation Errors
A calculation error is one that a student makes when computing an answer. For example, failure 
to rename correctly would be a calculation error. Errors of this sort do not require reteaching 
of the word-problem strategies. Rather, remediation on the calculation procedure would be 
necessary.

[p.219]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 219
Decoding Errors
Reading a word or words in a problem incorrectly is a decoding error. For example, if a student 
reads broke instead of bought in the following problem, he will use the wrong operation: “Taryn 
had 8 glasses. She bought 6. How many does she have now?” The decoding error would cause 
the student to subtract 6 from 8 rather than add 6 + 8. Having the student read the problem 
aloud helps determine whether the error is a decoding error.
Teachers can help students who have difficulty decoding by previewing difficult words 
before students encounter them in word problems. Teachers of students who are unable to 
decode written word problems easily should not require students to read the problems but should 
read the problems to the student.
Vocabulary Errors
Vocabulary errors occur when students do not know the meaning of key words in the word prob­
lems. For example, in the following problem, students must know that “receives” means “to get 
more.”
Curt has 18 pairs of socks. He receives 4 more pairs for his birthday. How many pairs of 
socks does he have now?
Teachers can easily determine if the error is related to vocabulary knowledge by simply ask­
ing the student what the word means. To prevent vocabulary errors, teachers would present the 
meaning of critical vocabulary words prior to presenting the word problems.
Translation Errors
If a student fails to translate a problem into the correct equation and uses the wrong operation, 
the student has made a translation error. For example,
Naveah now has 7 video games. She started out with 2 video games that she received for her 
birthday. How many more video games has she gotten since then?
7 + 2 = 9
In this problem, the student added instead of subtracting. The teacher begins remediation by 
examining the student’s work over a period of days to determine if the same type of problem is 
consistently missed. Remediation can be done through a worksheet exercise using the less struc­
tured format for that particular problem type. The worksheet should include at least 10 prob­
lems, half of which represent the type of problem that was missed with the other half including 
problems to provide discrimination practice.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED
Click on the √ to answer the questions online.
1. Tell what type of word problem each of the following examples represents using the types described 
in the Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart.
a. Terrell has 15 green apples and 17 red apples. He wants to split them equally among his four 
friends. How many apples should he give to each friend?
b. Asia has been running for several months. She runs 5 miles each day. How many miles will she 
run in 10 days?
c. There are 20 balls in the toy closet. Eight of the balls are baseballs. How many of the balls are not 
baseballs?
d. Isabella has 2 pens in each pocket. She has 8 pens. How many pockets does she have?
e. Emmy has 8 dollars. Then she earned 3 dollars. How many dollars does she have now?
f. A girl is 15 years old. Her brother is 2 years younger. How old is her brother?

[p.220]
220 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
2. Word problems can be made easier or more difficult by changing one or more aspects. Outline several 
ways in which problems can be made more difficult. For each problem in the item above, change or 
add to the problem to increase its level of difficulty in some way.
3. Explain the possible cause of the following errors. When the cause of the error is unclear, tell what 
the teacher does to determine the specific cause. Specify the remediation procedure called for if errors 
of this type occur frequently.
a. Valeria’s team scored 54 points. The other team scored 19 points fewer. How many did the other 
team score? 36 points
b. The ABC Company produced 1,534 pool tables last year. This year, production decreased by 112 
pool tables. How many pool tables did the ABC Company produce this year? 1,646 pool tables
c. Matias baked 6 cakes every week. He baked for 18 weeks. How many cakes did he bake? 
3 cakes
d. Tara took 20 shots in the basketball game. She made 15 shots. How many shots did she miss? 
35 shots
e. There are 10 boys and 20 girls in the class. Each row can seat 5 students. How many rows will 
there be? 35 rows
f. There are 28 students. The teacher wants to divide them into 4 equal groups. How many students 
will be in each group? 6 students
g. A factory produces 325 cars a day. How many cars will it produce in 25 days? 8,105 cars
4. Write a structured worksheet format using tables to guide students through solving this problem: 
Twenty-eight vehicles went past our house. Twelve of the vehicles were cars. How many vehicles 
were not cars?
5. Write a structured worksheet format to guide students through solving this problem: Ann runs 5 miles 
every day. So far she has run 20 miles. How many days has she run?
Format 11.1
INTRODUCING PROBLEM-SOLVING CONCEPTS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill: Visual Representation
Addition Problem
1. Listen: Ann has 7 apples. She gets 3 more apples. She ends 
with how many apples?
2. Let's draw a picture of that problem. Ann has 7 apples. (Draw 
the illustration below on the board.)
0000000
She gets 3 more apples, so I draw 3 more. (Draw 3 more 
apples.)
0000000 000
3. Let's write the equation. Here's the first sentence again. Ann 
has 7 apples. How many apples does Ann have? 7
I write 7 under the 7 apples. (Write 7.)
Here's the next sentence. She gets 3 more apples. How many 
more apples did she get? 3

[p.221]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 221
TEACHER STUDENTS
Yes, Ann gets 3 more. What do 1 write for gets 3 more?
(Write + 3.)
The problem says she ends up with how many apples? So 1 
write equals and a box, like this: (Write = □: 7 + 3 = □J
Plus 3
4. Read the equation.
Let's count and see how many we end up with. (Touch pictures
7 + 3 equals how many?
of apples as students count.)
So Ann ends with 10 apples (Write 10 in the box.)
Subtraction Problem
1. Listen: Ann has 7 apples. She gives away 3 apples. She ends 
with how many apples?
2. Let's draw a picture of that problem. Ann has 7 apples, so 1 
draw 7 apples. (Draw apples.)
0000000
She gives away 3 apples, so I'll cross out 3 apples. (Cross out 3 
apples.)
0000000
3. Let's write the equation. Here's the first sentence again. Ann
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
has 7 apples. How many apples did Ann have?
I'll write a 7 (Write 7.)
Here's the next sentence. She gives away 3 apples. How many
7
apples did she give away? 3
What do 1 write for gives away 3 apples?
Yes, she gives away 3, so we write - 3. (Write -3.)
The problem says she ends with how many apples? So 1 write 
equals and a box.
(Write = □.∙ 7 - 3 = □J
Minus 3
4. Read the equation.
Let's count the apples that are left and see how many she
7-3 equals how many?
ends with. (Touch the remaining apples.)
So, Ann ends with 4 apples. (Write 4 in the box.)
(Repeat addition or subtraction steps 1-4 with several more 
problems.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet that contains a mix of addition and 
subtraction problems and includes a box and the word for the 
unit answer, like the following.)
a. Jim has 6 marbles. He finds 2 more marbles. He ends with 
how many marbles?
□ marbles
1, 2, 3, 4
continued

[p.222]
222 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.1 (continued)
INTRODUCING PROBLEM-SOLVING CONCEPTS
TEACHER
b. Jim has 6 marbles. He gives away 2 marbles. He ends with 
how many marbles?
□ marbles
Touch problem a. Listen: Jim has 6 marbles. He finds 2 more 
marbles. He ends with how many marbles?
2. Let's draw a picture of that problem. Jim has 6 marbles. Draw 
the marbles. (Wait while the students draw on their papers, 
then draw the marbles on the board.)
STUDENTS
He finds 2 more marbles. Draw those. (Wait, then draw the 
marbles on the board.)
oooooo oo
3. Let's write the equation.
Read the first sentence again.
How many marbles did Jim have?
Write 6 under the 6 marbles. (Wait, then write 6 on board.)
Read the next sentence.
How many more marbles did he get?
Yes, Jim finds 2 more. What do you write for finds 2 more?
Yes, write + 2. (Wait, then write +2 on board.)
The problem says he ends with how many marbles? So, what 
do you write?
Write equals how many. (Wait, then write = □ on board:
6 + 2 = 0.)
4. Read the equation.
Let's count and see how many we end with. (Touch pictures of 
marbles as students count.)
Write 8 in the box after the equal sign.
Now, write 8 in the answer box next to the word marbles. Jim 
ends with 8 marbles.
Subtraction Problem
1. Touch the next problem. Listen: Jim has 6 marbles. He gives 
away 2 marbles. He ends with how many marbles?
2. Let's draw a picture of that problem. Jim has 6 marbles. Draw 
the marbles. (Wait while students draw on their papers, then 
draw the marbles on board.)
OOOOOO
oooooo oo
Jim has 6 marbles. 
6
He finds 2 more marbles.
2
Plus 2
Equals box
6 + 2 equals how many?
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
OOOOOO

[p.223]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 223
TEACHER STUDENTS
He gives away 2 marbles. Cross them out (Wait, then cross out 
two marbles.)
00O O O O 00OOOO
3. Let's write the equation. Jim has 6 marbles. How many marbles 
does Jim have? 6
Write a 6. (Write 6 on board.)
How many does he give away? 2
What do you write for gives away 2 marbles? Minus 2
Yes, he gives away 2, so write - 2. (Write - 2 on board.)
The problem says he ends with how many marbles, so what 
do you write? Equals box
Write it. (Wait, then write = □ on board: 6 - 2 = □J
4. Read the equation. 6-2 equals how many?
Let's count the marbles that are left and see how many he 
ends with, (Touch the remaining marbles.) 1, 2, 3, 4
Write 4 in the box after the equal sign. (Wait, then write 4 in 
the box.)
Now write 4 in the answer box next to the word marbles. Jim 
ends with 4 marbles.
(Repeat addition or subtraction steps 1-4 with several more 
problems.)
Format 11.2
PRESKILL: FACT FAMILY—FINDING THE MISSING FAMILY MEMBER
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Subtraction Rule
1. (Write this diagram on the board.)
2. Three numbers go together to make a fact family. (Point to 8.)
The total number is always at the end of the arrow.
(Point to 2.) This number is part of the total.
(Point to 6.) Here's the other part of the total.
(Erase the 8.) Sometimes, we don't know the total and we have to figure it out.
EE.__ _
continued

[p.224]
224 Part ∏ Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.2 (continued)
PRESKILL: FACT FAMILY—FINDING THE MISSING FAMILY MEMBER
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Write the 8 back in; erase the 6.) Sometimes, we don't know part of the total and we 
have to figure it out.
3. (Write the following diagram on the board.)
Is the total number given in this problem?
Here's the rule: When the total number is given, we subtract. The total number is 10. 
So I start with 10 and subtract 3. (Write 10 - 3 on the bottom line.) What is 10 - 3?
So, I write equals 7. (Write = 7 on the line.)
Now I write 7 in the empty box. (Write 7 in box.)
The numbers 3 and 7 are the parts of the total. The number 10 is the total number.
4. (Write the following diagram on the board.) 
□ ≡
Is the total number given?
What do we do when the total number is given?
Remember, when you subtract, you start with the total number. What problem do I 
write on the line?
(Write 12 - 5 on the line.) What is 12 - 5?
(Write = 7 on the line.) What number goes in the empty box? (Write 7 in the box.)
(Repeat step 4 with these problems.)
Yes
7
Yes
Subtract
12-5
7
7
Part B: Addition Rule
1. (Write the following diagram on the board.)

[p.225]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 225
TEACHER
2. In this problem, the total number is not given. When the total number is not given, 
we add.
Is the total number given in this problem?
Watch. The parts are 3 and 5, so I add 3 and 5. (Write 3 + 5 on the line.) What is 3 + 5?
So, I write equals 8. (Write = 8 on the line.)
Now, I write 8 in the empty box. The numbers 3 and 5 are the parts of the total.
The number 8 is the total.
3. (Write the following diagram on the board.)
Is the total number given?
What do we do when the total number is not given?
What problem do I write on the line? (Write 7 + 2 on the line.)
What is 7 + 2? (Write = 9 on the line.)
What number goes in the empty box? (Write 9 in the box.) 
(Repeat step 3 with the problems below.)
S [6] ___  ® ® _ ___
Part C: Structured Worksheet
STUDENTS
No
8
No 
Add 
7 + 2 
9 
9
1. You must figure out the missing number in all these problems. It might be the total 
number or it might be part of the total.
If the total number is given, what must you do?
If the total number is not given, what must you do?
(Repeat step 1 until students answer correctly.)
Subtract
Add
continued

[p.226]
226 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.2 (continued)
PRESKILL: FACT FAMILY—FINDING THE MISSING FAMILY MEMBER
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. Touch the first problem.
Touch the box for the total.
Is the total given? No
So what must you do? Add
What problem do you write on the line? 3 + 2
Write it.
What is 3 + 2? 5
Write an equals sign and the answer.
Fill in the empty box.
(Repeat step 2 with remaining problems.)
Part D: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet like that in Part C.)
2. Touch the first problem.
3. Is the total number given or not given?
4. Do you add or subtract?
5. Write the equation on the line and write the answer.
(Repeat steps 2-5 with all problems.)
Format 11.3
TEMPORAL SEQUENCE WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill—Determining if One Starts or Ends with More
1. We're going to figure out if a person starts or ends with more.
2. Jimmy buys books. Does he start or end with more?
Jimmy sells books. Does he start or end with more?
Mary gives away apples. Does she start or end with more?
Mary loses money. Does she start or end with more?
Mary finds money. Does she start or end with more?
Sally makes some dolls. Does she start or end with more?
Sally throws away her old shoes. Does she start or end with more?
Mike collects some stamps. Does he start or end with more?
Ends with more. 
Starts with more. 
Starts with more. 
Starts with more. 
Ends with more. 
Ends with more.
Starts with more. 
Ends with more.

[p.227]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 227
continued
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Give students a worksheet with the following problems.)
a. Billy buys some ties. Then he buys 8 more ties. He ends up with 23 ties. How 
many did he buy at first?
b. Sandra had 8 eggs in the fridge. She ate 2 eggs for breakfast. How many eggs 
does she have now?
c. Walter had some apples in a basket. After he gave away 11 apples, he had 
9 apples left. How many apples did he start with?
d. Sam began with 14 bricks on his toy truck. He put another 12 bricks on the 
truck. How many bricks ended up on the truck?
2. We're going to make number families for these problems. First, we'll figure 
out if the person starts or ends with more. I'll read the first part of each 
problem.
3. Problem a. Billy buys some ties. Then he buys 8 more ties. Listen. Billy buys ties. 
So does he start or end with more? Ends with more
Yes, he ends with more, so ends is the name for the total. 
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
EndsA _________ ⅛C3. 7
4. Problem b. Sandra had 8 eggs in the fridge. She ate 2 eggs for breakfast. Listen.
Sandra ate eggs. So does she start or end with more? Starts with more
Yes, she starts with more, so starts is the name for the total. 
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
, Startsb. --------------->
5. Problem c. Walter had some apples in a basket. After he gave away 11 apples, he 
had 9 apples left. Listen. Walter gave away apples. So does he start or end with 
more? Starts with more
He starts with more, so starts is the name for the total. 
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
Starts r _________ ⅛
6. Problem d. Sam began with 14 bricks on his toy truck. He put another 12 bricks 
on the truck. Listen. Sam put more bricks on the truck. So does he start or end 
with more? Ends with more
He ends with more, so ends is the name for the total.
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
, EndscL --------------->

[p.228]
228 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.3 (continued)
TEMPORAL SEQUENCE WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
7. Now let's go back and put in the numbers we know. Problem a. We know Billy 
ends with more. Let's see if we know how many he ends with. Billy buys some 
ties. Then he buys 8 more ties. He ends up with 23 ties. Do we know how many
he ends with? Yes
How many?
So I write 23 for ends.
(Write 23 in the diagram.)
Ends
a' --------------->23
We don't know how many he buys at first, so I write a box.
(Draw "how-many box" in the diagram.)
[—1 Ends
a^ —-----------.23
We know he buys 8 more.
(Write 8 in the diagram.)
a. □___ « “
23
8. Now we have our number family. The total is given. Do we add or subtract? Subtract
Say the problem we work.
When we work that problem, we figure out he bought 15 ties at first.
9. Problem b. We know Sandra starts with more. Let's see if we know how many 
she starts with. Sandra had 8 eggs in the fridge. She ate 2 eggs for breakfast. Do
23-8
we know how many she starts with? Yes
How many?
So write 8 for starts.
(Write 8 in diagram.)
Starts
b.  > 8
She ate 2 for breakfast, and we don't know how many she has now.
(Write 2 and "how-many box" in diagram.)
2 q Starts
c.  > 8
8
The total is given. Do we add or subtract? Subtract
Say the problem we'll work. 8-2
What's 8-2?
So now she has 6 eggs left.
6

[p.229]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 229
TEACHER STUDENTS
10. Problem c. We figured out Walter starts with more. Let's see if we know how 
many he starts with. Walter had some apples in a basket. He gave away 11 
apples. Do we know how many he starts with?
So I'll write a box for the total.
(Write "how-many box" in diagram.)
No
Starts
We know he gives away 11 and has 9 left. 
(Write 11 and 9 in diagram.)
11. We need to figure out the total. Do we add or subtract?
Say the problem.
11 + 9 = 20, so Walter started out with 20 apples.
12. Problem d. We know Sam ends with more. Let's see if we know how many he 
ends with. Sam began with 14 bricks on his toy truck. He put another 12 bricks 
on the truck. How many bricks ended up on the truck?
Do we know how many he ends with?
So I'll write a box.
(Write "how-many box" in the diagram.)
Add
11+9
No
13. He begins with 14 and puts on another 12.
(Write 14 and 12 in the diagram.)
Ends
d. -------------- >∣-1
Do we add or subtract?
Say the problem.
When we add, we get 26.
So 26 bricks ended up on the truck.
Part C: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with the following problems.)
a. Tracy started out with $10 in her bank account. She put $8 in her account. 
How much money did she end up with in her account?
b. Roger dropped and broke 4 glasses. If he started out with 9 glasses, how 
many glasses does he have now?
c. After buying some toy cars at the swap meet, Tony had 17 cars in his 
collection. Before the swap meet, he had 12 cars in his collection. How many 
cars did he buy?
d. Joe had too many kittens. He gave away 8 kittens and had 3 left. How many 
kittens did Joe start out with?
Add
14 + 12
continued

[p.230]
230 Part ∏ Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.3 (continued)
TEMPORAL SEQUENCE WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. You're going to make number families for these problems. Read problem a to 
yourself. Raise your hand when you know if Tracy starts or ends with more. 
(Monitor students.)
3. Does Tracy start or end with more?
Make your number-family arrow. Write ends over the place for total. (Check.)
Here's what you should have.
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
Ends
a. --------------- »
4. The problem asks how much she ends up with. Do we know how much she 
ends with?
So what do we write for ends?
Write a box. Then put in the numbers the problem gives. (Check.)
(Write to show: Draw the box first, then write 10 and 8 in the diagram.)
Here's the number family for problem a.
5. Read problem b to yourself. Raise your hand when you know if Roger starts or 
ends with more. (Monitor students.)
6. Does Roger start or end with more?
Make your number-family arrow. Write starts over the place for total. (Check.)
7. Read the problem again. Raise your hand when you know what we write for 
starts. (Monitor students.)
What did you write?
Yes, he starts with 9 glasses. Write 9 for the total, then complete the number 
family. (Check.)
Here's the number family for problem b.
8. (Write the following diagram on the board.)
4 π Starts
b. ---------------» 9
9. Read problem c to yourself. Raise your hand when you know if Tony starts or 
ends with more. (Monitor students.)
10. Does Tony start or end with more?
Make your number-family arrow with the word ends. (Check.)
11. Raise your hand when you know what to write for ends. (Monitor students.) 
What do you write?
Yes, he ends with 17. Complete the number family with two numbers and a 
box. (Check.)
Here's the number family for problem c.
Ends with more
No
A box
Starts with more
9
Ends with more
17

[p.231]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 231
TEACHER STUDENTS
12. (Write the following diagram on the board.)
12 □ ^ds
C. ------------------- » 17
13. Read problem d to yourself. Raise your hand when you know if Joe starts or 
ends with more (Monitor students.)
14. Does Joe start or end with more?
Raise your hand when you know what to write for starts. (Monitor students.) 
What do you write?
Yes, the problem asks how many kittens he starts out with, so you write a box.
Complete the number family with two numbers and a box. (Check.)
Here's the number family for problem d.
15. (Write the following diagram on the board.)
Starts
d. 5------------⅛□
16. Figure out the answer to each problem. Remember the unit names. 
(Monitor while students work.)
17. Tell me the answer for each problem.
Problem a. How much money did Milly end with?
Problem b. How many glasses does Roger have now?
Problem c. How many cars did Tony buy?
Problem d. How many kittens did Joe start out with?
Part D: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with the following problems.)
a. J.R. found 9 shells on the beach. He already had 15 shells in his collection. 
How many shells does he have now?
b. Luca went on a diet and lost 25 pounds. Before his diet, he weighed
195 pounds. How much does he weigh now?
c. Mike started out with lots of fish. He threw back 8 fish and still had 9 left.
How many fish did he start with?
d. After Emily added 12 stories to her brick tower, the tower is 15 stories high. 
How high was her tower to start with?
2. For some of these problems, the person starts with more. For some, the person 
ends with more.
3. Problem a. Read the problem. Raise your hand when you know if the person 
starts or ends with more. (Monitor students.) Which is it?
4. Make the complete number family. Remember to label the total. (Check.)
Here's what you should have.
5. (Write the following diagram on the board.)
Ends
a√--------- 15. □
Starts with more
A box
18 dollars
5 glasses
5 cars
11 kittens
Ends with more
continued

[p.232]
232 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.3 (continued)
TEMPORAL SEQUENCE WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
6. Now figure out the answer. Remember the unit name. (Check.)
7. How many shells does J.R. have now? 24 shells
(Repeat steps 3-7 with other items; each number family and step 7 is shown 
below.)
r-. Starts
b 25 □ > 195
How much does Luca weigh now? 170 pounds
Starts
c 8______ t□
How many fish did Mike catch? 17 fish
π Ends
d. ------- ⅛15
How high was Emily's tower to start with? 3 stories
Format 11.4
COMPARISON PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill: Determining the Total Number
1. Comparison problems tell you about two persons or things. Here are some 
words you'll see in comparison problems: bigger, older, smaller, taller, wider. If 
the problem tells about two people and has a word that ends in er, you know 
it's a comparison problem.
2. Let's practice figuring out which person or thing in a comparison problem tells 
about the big number.
3. Listen: A dog weighs 7 pounds. A cat weighs 3 pounds more than the dog. 
Who does that problem tell about?
4. Listen to the problem again. (Repeat problem.) Who is heavier?
5. So the big number tells how many pounds the cat weighs.
(Repeat steps 3-5 with the problems below.)
Jill is 10 years old. Brian is 8 years younger. Who is older?
Hole A is 6 feet deep. Hole B is 4 feet deep. Which hole is deeper?
Jack ran 8 miles. Ann ran 2 miles more. Who ran farther?
Jane weighs 60 pounds. Ann is 5 pounds lighter. Who is heavier?
A yellow pencil is 5 inches long. A blue pencil is 3 inches longer. Which pencil 
is longer?
A dog and a cat
The cat

[p.233]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 233
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students worksheets with problems written in the form below.)
The bigger number
Tom and bill 
Bill's stick
No
7 feet
Jack and May
Jack
Yes
10
a. Tom's stick is 2 feet long.
Bill's stick is 5 feet longer.
How long is Bill's stick?
Answer:_____
b. Jack is 10 years old.
May is 2 years younger.
How old is May?
Answer:_____
--------------- >
2. You're going to make number families for comparison problems. The name 
for the bigger number goes at the end of the arrow. The name for which 
number goes at the end of the arrow?
Yes, the bigger number tells about the total.
3. Read problem a. (Pause.)
4. Who does the problem tell about?
Which is longer, Bill's stick or Tom's stick?
Write Bill on the line above the end of the arrow. (Check.)
5. Read the problem again. (Pause.)
Does a number in the problem tell how long Bill's stick is?
Make a box below Bill. (Check.)
6. The problem doesn't give a number for the total. The numbers in the problem 
tell about parts of the total. Write those numbers on the arrow. (Check.)
7. Write the problem and figure out the answer. (Check.) 
What's the answer?
8. So Bill's stick is 7 feet long.
Write 7 feet on the answer line.
9. Read problem b. (Pause.)
10. Who does the problem tell about?
11. Who is older, Jack or May?
Write Jack on the line above the end of the arrow.
12. Read the problem again. (Pause.)
Does the problem tell how old Jack is?
How old?
Write 10 below Jack.
13. The problem gives a number for the total.
Complete the number family with a number and a box. (Check.)
continued

[p.234]
234 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.4 (continued)
COMPARISON PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
14. Write the problem and figure out the answer. (Check.) 
What's the answer? 8
15. So May is 8 years old.
Write 8 years on the answer line.
(Repeat steps 3-8 with remaining addition problems. Repeat steps 9-15 with 
remaining subtraction problems.)
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with a mix of addition and subtraction problems.)
a. Martha's cat weighs 2 pounds more than Sarah's cat. Martha's cat weighs
12 pounds. How much does Sarah's cat weigh?
b. The trip to the library is 6 miles. The trip to the zoo is 3 miles further than 
the library. How far is it to the zoo?
c. Greg has 12 cars in his collection. Will has 15 cars in his collection. How many 
more cars does Will have than Greg?
d. There are 5 fewer children in Fay's family than in Joe's family. There are
3 children in Fay's family. How many children are in Joe's family?
2. Read problem a. (Pause.)
3. Make a number-family arrow. Write the word that tells about the total above 
the total place. (Check.)
4. See if the number for the total is given in the problem. Then write two 
numbers and a box where they belong. (Check.)
Martha
2 □ 12--------------- >
5. Write the problem and figure out the answer.
Then write the whole answer. (Check.)
12
-2
10 10 pounds
6. What's the answer? 10 pounds
(Repeat steps 2-6 with the remaining problems.)
Format 11.5
CLASSIFICATION STORY PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill: Language
1. I'll say some class names. You tell me the biggest class. Listen: cats, animals, dogs. What 
is the biggest class?
(Repeat step 1 with hammer, saw, tool; vehicle, car, truck; men, women, people; girls, 
boys, children.)
Animals

[p.235]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 235
continued
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with 6-8 problems written like those below.)
Subtract
Add
Children
Yes
8
3
Yes 
Subtract
5
a. There are 8 children; 3 are boys. How many 
are girls?
--------------- >
b. Jill has 5 hammers and 4 saws. How many tools does 
she have?
--------------- >
2. Let's review some rules you already know. If the total number is given, what do you do? 
If the total number is not given, what do you do?
3. In some problems, we don't see words like find, lose, buy, or give away, so we have to 
use a different way to do these problems.
4. Touch the first problem. I'll read it. There are 8 children; 3 are boys. How many are girls? 
The problem talks about children, boys, and girls. Which is the big class, children, boys, 
or girls?
If children is the big class, then the number of children is the total number. So write 
children on the line above the total place.
5. Listen. (Repeat the problem.) Children is the total number. Does the problem tell how 
many children?
Make a box below children.
So the total number is given. What is the total number?
Write 8 in the box for the total number.
(Note: If the first answer is no, tell the students), "The total is not given, so we don't 
write anything in the box for the total."
6. Now we write the values for boys and girls on the arrow. How many boys?
Write 3.
We don't know how many girls, so we write a box above the arrow.
7. Is the total number given?
So what do you do to work out the problem?
We start with 8 children and subtract 3 boys to find out how many girls.
Write the equation and figure out the answer.
If there are 8 children and 3 are boys, how many are girls?
(Repeat steps 4-7 with remaining problems.)

[p.236]
236 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.5 (continued)
CLASSIFICATION STORY PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems in this form.)
Jerry has 7 pets; 4 are dogs.
How many are cats?
Jerry has 7 pets; 4 are dogs. 
How many are cats?
--------------- >
2. Touch the first problem.
3. Read the problem. Then write the name for the big class above the total place.
4. Write the two numbers and box where they belong.
5. Write the equation and figure out the answer.
6. Write the whole answer on the answer line.
(Repeat steps 2-6 with remaining problems.)
Format 11.6
USING TABLES TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
TEACHER
(See Videos Parts A∕BCD)
STUDENTS
Part A: Introducing Rows and Columns in a Table
1. (Write the table below on the board.)
6 6 1
2 3 2
1 1 2
2. This is a table problem. To work this kind of problem, you have to add the numerals 
in each column and the numerals in each row. Remember that columns go up and 
down. Rows go side to side. Point to show me which way columns go. (Check to 
make sure that students point up and down.) Point and show me which way rows 
go. (Check to make sure that students point side to side. Repeat to correct.)
3. (Touch the first column.) I'll read the numerals in the first column: 6, 2, 1.
4. (Touch the second column.) Read the numerals in this column.
5. (Touch the third column.) Read the numerals in this column.
6. (Touch the top row.) I'll read the numerals in the top row: 6, 6, 1.
6, 3, 1
1, 2, 2

[p.237]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 237
TEACHER STUDENTS
7. (Touch the middle row.) Your turn. Read the numerals in the middle row.
8. (Touch the bottom row.) Read the numerals in the bottom row.
2, 3, 2
1, 1, 2
Part B: Finding Totals in Tables
1. Go back to the first column. The numerals are 6, 2,1. Here's how you work the 
problem. You add 6 and 2. What's the answer?
2. Then you add 8 and 1. What's the answer?
3. 9 is the total for the first column. (Write 9 at the bottom of the first column.)
4. Your turn. Add the numerals in the next column and raise your hand when you 
know the answer. (Wait for students to solve the problem.) The numerals in this 
column are 6, 3, and 1. What is the answer, everyone?
5. (Repeat procedure with last column.)
6. The numerals for the top row are 6, 6, and 1. What is 6 + 6?
What's 12 + 1? (Write 13 at the end of the row.)
7. Your turn. Add the numerals in the middle row and raise your hand when you have 
the answer. (Wait for students to solve the problem.) The numerals in this row are 
2, 3, and 2. What is the answer, everyone?
8. (Repeat procedure with last row.)
8
9
10
12
13
7
Part C: Using the Number-Family Strategy to Solve for Missing Data
1. (Write the following table on the board.)
2. This is a table with arrows for the rows and columns. The arrows show you 
something interesting about the table. Each row and column works just like a 
number family. The first two numerals in the row are the small numbers. The total 
is the big number.
3. (Touch row a.) A numeral is missing in that row. Is the missing numeral a big 
number or a small number?
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
_______ ∞ 45
4. So do you add or subtract to find the missing numeral?
5. Say the subtraction problem.
6. (Touch row b. Write the diagram below on the board.)
15 11--------------- >
Here is the number family for that row. Is the missing numeral a small number or 
the big number?
A small number
Subtract
45 - 38
The big number
continued

[p.238]
238 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.6 (continued)
USING TABLES TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
u
Part D: Using Tables to Solve Word Problems
TEACHER STUDENTS
7. So do you add or subtract to find the missing numeral?
8. Say the addition problem.
9. (Touch row c.) Is the missing numeral a small number or the big number?
10. So do you add or subtract?
11. Say the subtraction problem.
12. Your turn. Write the problem and the answer for each row. Write the column 
problem for rows a, b, and c. (Wait for students to finish the problems.)
13. Everyone, read the problems and the answers. Get ready:
Add
15 + 11
A small number
Subtract
31 - 12
row a, 
row b, 
row c.
45 - 38 = 7
15 + 11 = 26
31 - 12 = 19
14. What is the missing numeral in row a? (Write 7 in row a.)
What is the missing numeral in row b? (Write 26 in row b.)
What is the missing numeral in row c? (Write 19 in row c.)
15. Figure out the totals for each column. (Wait for students to finish the column 
problems.)
16. Read the totals for the columns:
7
26
19
first column, 
second column.
34
68
1. (Students have worksheets with several problems similar to the one below.)
Facts: There are 23 red cars on Al's lot and Jim's lot has 12 green cars. The total 
number of red and green cars on Jim's lot is 43. The total number of green cars on 
both lots is 30.
Red cars Green cars Total for both colors
Jim's lot
AΓs lot
Total for both lots
Questions
a. Are there fewer green cars or red cars on both lots?
b. How many green and red cars are on AΓs lot?
c. There are 31 cars of some color on Jim's lot. What color?
d. Are there more green cars on Jim's lot or Al's lot?

[p.239]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 239
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. We're going to use a table to answer the questions listed above. First we need to 
fill in any missing information from the facts that are given. Read the first fact.
Write the value from that fact in the correct place in the table.
(Repeat step 2 with the remaining facts.)
3. Now you have enough information to complete the table using the number-family 
strategy. If one of the small numbers is missing, what do you do?
If one of the totals is missing, what do you do?
(Monitor while students complete the table.)
4. Now that the table is complete, read question a and raise your hand when you 
know the answer. (Call on an individual student to answer question a.) Everyone, 
write the correct answer next to the question.
5. (Repeat step 4 for each question.)
To correct: If students make a mistake locating the correct information, have them 
put their fingers on the cell that has the information to answer the question. Monitor 
where students place their fingers to determine if they are able to read the table. 
If they have problems locating the correct cells, then reteach Part C of this format, 
adding a question about the information represented in each row and column.
There are 23 red 
cars on AΓs lot.
Subtract
Add
Format 11.7
INTRODUCING MULTI-STEP WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Introducing Ends-in-Out Format
1. (Write the following problems on the board.)
a. A wallet is empty. $432 goes into that wallet. Then some money goes out of 
that wallet. The wallet ends up with $85. How much went out?
b. A florist starts without any roses. She picks up 87 roses. She sells 54 roses. How 
many roses does she end up with?
c. Chandra had an empty basket. She put some eggs in the basket. Then she gave 
away 37 of those eggs. The basket still had 14 eggs in it. How many eggs did 
Chandra put in the basket?
End up Out In 
------------------------ >
2. Listen while I read problem a. A wallet is empty. $432 goes into that wallet. Then 
some money goes out of that wallet. The wallet ends up with $85. How much 
went out?
3. In this problem, some money goes into the wallet, and some money goes out of 
the wallet. How much money does the wallet end up with?
So I will write $85 under "end up" in the number family.
(Write $85 on the board.)
End up Out In
$85____________ >
$85
continued

[p.240]
240 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.7 (continued)
INTRODUCING MULTI-STEP WORD PROBLEMS
End up
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. Do we know how much money went out of the wallet?
So we do not know the other small number.
No
5. Do we know how much money went into the wallet? Yes
6. How much money went into the wallet?
So we can write that for the big number. (Write $432 under "in" on the board.)
End up Out In
$85____________ >$432
7. Now that we know two numbers for the number family, we can figure out the
$432
third number. What is missing, a big number or a small number? A small number.
8. How do we find a missing small number? Subtract
9. Say the subtraction problem.
10. (Repeat steps 2-9 for problems b and c.)
Part B: Structured Board Presentation—Multi-step Problems
1. (Write the following problems on the board.)
a. Josh had $17 in the bank. Later he put $12 in the bank. The next day he went 
to the bank and took out $11.50. How much money did Josh end up with in 
the bank?
b. A water tank had some water in it. 250 gallons were taken from the tank. 
Then another 720 gallons were taken from the tank. The tank still had 1150 
gallons in it. How many gallons were in the tank in the beginning?
c. A farmer had 534 bales of hay. She fed 247 bales to her cattle. She sold 85 
bales to a neighbor. She threw 4 bales away because they were moldy. How 
many bales did she end up with?
2. Listen while I read problem a: Josh had $17 in the bank. Later he put $12 in the 
bank. The next day he went to the bank and took out $11.50. How much money 
did Josh end up with in the bank? The first part of the problem tells about the 
two values that went in the bank. Here is the number family:
End up Out In
$432 - $85
3. What is the first value that went in the bank?
(Write $17 in the number family.)
End up Out In
$17
$17
4. What is the second value that went in the bank? 
(Write $12 on the board.)
$12
Out In
$17
-→ 12

[p.241]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 241
TEACHER STUDENTS
5. Do we know how much Josh took out of the bank? Yes
How much?
So we write $11.50 in the number family.
(Write $11.50 on the board.)
End up Out In
$17
$11.50 12------------------------ >
$11.50
6. Now we need to add the amounts that went into the bank. Say the problem. $17 + $12
What is the total?
(Write $29 on the board.)
End up Out In
$17
$11.50 12
------------------------ > $29
7. Now that we have two numerals in the number family, we can figure out the
$29
other number. What is missing, a big number or a small number? A small number
8. How do we find a missing small number? Subtract
9. Say the subtraction problem.
10. Subtract to figure out how much money Josh ended up with in the bank.
$29.00 - $11.50
How much?
11. (Repeat for problems b and c.)
$17.50
Format 11.8
INTRODUCTION TO MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION 
WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Write the following diagrams on the board.)
© © © □ D
© © © -------------- >C
2. We are going to use a multiplication number family to find out how many cents are 
in this picture. Remember, in multiplication number families, if the big number is not 
given, you must multiply. If the big number is given, then you must divide to find the 
answer.
What must you do if the big number is not given?
What must you do if the big number is given?
What coins are shown in this picture?
3. The total number of cents is the big number. C is already written on the diagram 
for cents.
Multiply 
Divide 
Dimes
continued

[p.242]
242 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.8 (continued)
INTRODUCTION TO MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION
WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. How many cents is each dime worth?
So 10 is the first small number. (Write 10 and D.)
10 D
-------------------- »C
10 cents
5. How many dimes are there?
6. So I cross out the D for dimes and write 6. (Cross out D and write 6.)
6
10 &
--------------------->C
6
7. Look at the diagram. Is the big number given? No
8. If the big number is not given, what do you need to do? Multiply
9. What is 10 times 6?
(Cross out C and write 60.)
60
10. What is the total number of cents?
11. (Repeat steps 1-10 with similar problems using nickels, dimes, and quarters. Later 
problems do not need to show pictures of coins but can describe them as in the 
following problems.)
a. You have some nickels. You have 35 cents in all. How many nickels do you have?
b. You have some dimes. You have 9 dimes. How many cents do you have in all?
c. You have some nickels. You have 8 nickels. How many cents do you have in all?
d. You have some quarters. You have 5 quarters. How many cents do you have in all?
e. You have some dimes. You have 40 cents in all. How many dimes do you have?
60 cents
Format 11.9
SETTING UP MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Preskill: Writing Number Families
1. (Write the following problems on the board.)
a. Each box holds 7 cans. You have 35 cans. How many boxes do you have?
b. Each room had 10 lights. There were 8 rooms. How many lights were there in 
all the rooms?
c. Each dog had 9 bugs. There were 7 dogs. How many bugs were there on all 
the dogs?
d. Each cat had 9 fleas. There were 36 fleas in all. How many cats were there?
e. Each boy ate 2 hot dogs. There were 5 boys. How many hot dogs were eaten 
by all the boys?

[p.243]
Chapter 11 Problem Solving 243
TEACHER
2. These are word problems. To work them, you have to make multiplication 
number families. One sentence in each problem tells how to make the family. 
That sentence tells about each thing.
3. Listen while I read problem a. Each box holds 7 cans. You have 35 cans. How 
many boxes do you have? The first sentence gives you information for making 
the number family. Each box holds 7 cans. There are more cans than boxes. So 
cans is the big number.
4. What do we write to stand for box?
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
B
What do we write to show cans?
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
B
-------------------- * C
If can is the big number and box is a small number, what is the other 
small number?
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
1 B
-------------------- * C
5. Here is the number family. The next sentence tells you that you have 35 cans, 
so we cross out C and write 35.
(Write the following diagram on the board.)
7 B 35
-------------------- > G
6. Our number family shows a big number and a small number. You find the 
missing small number by finding out how many sevens are in 35.
7. How many boxes do you have?
(Write the final diagram on the board.)
7 $B 35 
-------------------- > G
8. (Repeat steps 2-7 using problems b, c, d, and e.)
Part B: Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with 6 to 8 problems similar to those below.)
a. There are 6 chairs at each table. If there are 42 chairs, how many tables are 
there?
b. Books are stacked on shelves with the same number of books on each shelf. 
There are 5 shelves and 40 books. How many books are on each shelf?
2. These are multiplication and division problems.
3. Read problem a to yourself. Raise your hand when you've found the sentence 
that tells how to make the number family. (Pause. Call on a student to read.)
STUDENTS
There are 6 chairs at 
each table.
B
C
7
5
continued

[p.244]
244 Part II Basic Concepts and Skills
Format 11.9 (continued)
SETTING UP MULTIPLICATION AND DIVISION WORD PROBLEMS
TEACHER STUDENTS
4. There are 6 chairs at each table. Are there more chairs or more tables?
So which name tells about the big number?
5. Make the number family with two letters and a number. (Check.)
Chairs
Chairs
Students write
6 T---------------------* C
6. The problem gives a value for one of the names. Which name?
7. Put that value in the number family. (Check.)
Chairs
Students write
6 T 42---------------------> G
8. Is the big number given?
So do you multiply or divide?
9. Work the problem and write the answer with a unit name, (Check.) 
10. What's the answer?
(Repeat steps 3-10 with other items.)
Yes
Divide
7 tables