[p.1]
Chapter
Direct Instruction
LEARNING OUTCOMES
1.1 Discuss the areas that comprise mathematical proficiency according to the 
National Research Council.
1.2 Outline the features of instructional design that are essential to mathematics 
instruction.
1.3 Discuss the four features of instructional delivery that are characteristic of Direct 
Instruction.
1.4 Explain the importance of explicitly teaching students mathematics vocabulary 
and concepts.
MATHEMATICAL PROFICIENCY
«•••••••
According to the National Research Council (2001), mathematical proficiency is represented by 
competency in five areas: conceptual understanding, procedural fluency, strategic competence, 
adaptive reasoning, and productive disposition. Many mathematics textbooks used in teacher 
preparation discuss the philosophy and theory of mathematics instruction and provide instruc­
tional activities, but few outline with specificity the means by which teachers can translate these 
areas into explicit instruction. Direct Instruction Mathematics provides teachers with a com­
prehensive blueprint to organize and teach specific content for major mathematical topics that 
appear in elementary and middle school. The textbook also provides teachers with strategies to 
address the needs of struggling learners. Each chapter in this text provides specific recommen­
dations to promote conceptual understanding (teaching language concepts and providing visual 
representations) and procedural fluency (teaching explicit strategies). Embedded in the chapters 
are recommendations to promote adaptive reasoning (asking students to explain their answers) 
and to determine strategic competence (monitoring student performance).
Regarding a productive disposition, research has suggested that when students experience 
success, they develop positive self-concepts (Stebbins, St. Pierre, Proper, Anderson, & Cerra, 
1977). More specifically, research in the area of Direct Instruction (see Chapter 2) leads us 
to conclude that well-designed instruction that promotes student mathematical proficiency, as 
outlined in this text, will yield productive dispositions.
In this chapter, we provide a detailed discussion of three critical components—instructional 
design, instructional delivery, and instructional language—that are essential to understanding

[p.2]
2 Part I Perspective
how Direct Instruction Mathematics addresses the five proficiency areas mentioned above. 
Building mathematics instruction with these components as the foundation will ensure that 
students acquire, retain, and generalize new learning in as humane, efficient, and effective a 
manner as possible.
INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN ∙∙∙∙∙**∙
To effectively teach mathematics, teachers must construct the kinds of lessons and develop the 
specific teaching procedures that best meet the needs of their students. Throughout the chapters in 
this text, we emphasize five essential instructional design features to assist teachers in designing 
mathematics instruction and in evaluating and modifying the commercial programs that have 
been adopted for use in their school or district. The learning theory underlying these features 
is elaborated in detail in Theory of Instruction (Engelmann & Carnine, 1991) and serves as the 
foundation for Direct Instruction programs. The website for the National Institute for Direct 
Instruction (NIFDI) provides detailed information about the commercially available Direct 
Instruction programs. Throughout this text we discuss the following features that represent 
instructional design elements essential to well-designed mathematics instruction:
1. Sequence of skills and concepts
2. Explicit instructional strategies
3. Preskills
4. Example selection
5, Practice and review
Before designing instruction or modifying it, teachers must clearly identify the objectives 
they want to teach. Most commercial programs specify student objectives for each instructional 
unit. However, not all objectives are written so that teachers can determine when they have 
been met. The objectives should be stated as specific, observable behaviors and include both 
accuracy and rate criteria, if possible. For example, a clear first-grade objective for single-digit 
addition is: “Given 25 single-digit addition problems, students will correctly solve at least 
22 in 1 minute with no more than one error.” Poorly stated objectives contain vague descriptions 
of student behavior that are difficult to measure, such as “Students will understand the concept 
of addition.”
Teachers can use the Instructional Sequence and Assessment Charts found at the begin­
ning of most chapters in this book as a guide to selecting important grade-level objectives. 
These charts, aligned with national Common Core State Standards for Mathematics (CCSSM) 
(National Governors Association Center for Best Practices & Council of Chief State School 
Officers, 2010), offer a sequence of instruction based on the difficulty level of the given prob­
lem types. Teachers can use the charts to help prioritize objectives, deciding which problem 
types to teach and in which sequence. Teachers of students who perform poorly should focus 
their instruction on higher-priority skills, those that are used more frequently, or those that are 
prerequisites for more advanced skills.
Once the teacher has determined the types of problems students should be able to work 
when they have completed the unit, the teacher must decide on appropriate levels of mastery. 
Both accuracy and fluency must be considered when specifying levels of mastery. Unfortu­
nately, there is little research available on determining accuracy and fluency criteria. Generally, 
teachers should provide supervised practice until students reach an 85% to 90% accuracy level 
for worksheet assignments containing a review of previously introduced types of problems. A 
fluency criterion usually depends on the relative complexity of the problem type. Most educa­
tors agree that students who work problems with relative fluency are more likely to retain strate­
gies over a longer period of time. We present more detail about fluency criteria in the section on 
progress monitoring later in this chapter.
Sequence of Skills and Concepts
The order in which information and skills are introduced affects the difficulty students have 
in learning them. Sequencing involves determining the optimum order for introducing new

[p.3]
Chapter 1 Direct Instruction 3
information and strategies. Following are three general guidelines for sequencing the introduction 
of new skills:
1. Teach preskills for a strategy before teaching the strategy.
2. Teach easy skills before more difficult ones.
3. Separate the introduction of information or strategies that students are likely to confuse.
Generally, the more steps in a strategy and the greater the similarity of the new strategy to 
previously taught strategies, the more likely students will have difficulty. For example, in column 
subtraction, problems that require a regrouping strategy are more difficult than problems that 
do not. But not all problems that require regrouping are of equal difficulty. A problem such as 
3,002 — 89 is significantly more difficult than a problem such as 364 — 128, largely due to the 
presence of zeros.
One of the preskills we recommend teaching for regrouping with zeros in problems like 
the one above is hundreds-minus-one problems (300 — 1 = 299). That preskill should be 
taught prior to introducing problems such as 3,002 — 89, which requires renaming 300 tens as 
299 tens. This example of identifying and teaching the appropriate preskills illustrates the first 
sequencing guideline.
299
30012
- 89
The instruction of easier skills before more difficult ones is the second sequencing guideline. 
For example, before teaching students to add fractions with unlike denominators, we recom­
mend teaching students the easier skill of adding fractions with like denominators. Although 
this guideline may seem obvious, many commercially available programs disregard its 
importance.
The third sequencing guideline is to separate the introduction of information and strate­
gies that are likely to be confused. The more similar two skills are, the more likely students 
are to confuse them. For example, because young students are likely to confuse identification 
of the numerals 6 and 9, those numerals should not be introduced consecutively. Likewise, 
the skip-counting series for 6s and 4s are quite similar in that they both contain 12, 24, and 
36 (6, 12, 18, 24, 30, 36 and 4, 8,12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36). Introducing these series consecu­
tively is likely to cause confusion for some students.
Explicit Instructional Strategies
Research suggests that teaching students explicit instructional strategies increases their per­
formance in mathematics. (See Chapter 2 for this research.) According to Archer and Hughes, 
explicit instruction is “instruction that is systematic, direct, engaging, and success-oriented” 
(2011, p. vii). In addition to being explicit, well-designed instructional strategies must be gener­
alizable. That is, a well-designed instructional strategy will apply to a range of different types of 
problems. For example, many programs introduce fractions to students using a single representa­
tion, such as a cookie, divided into thirds or fourths (1/3 or 2/4). When students are introduced 
to improper fractions (5/4), they often are unable to generalize the fraction concept. Students 
cannot conceptualize 5/4(1 ¼) if prior visual representations have been limited to one whole. A 
well-designed strategy for teaching students fraction concepts is one that applies to both proper 
and improper fractions. (See Chapter 13.)
Some commercially developed mathematics programs suggest that students generate a num­
ber of alternative strategies for the same problem. Rather than developing a conceptual founda­
tion that highlights mathematical relationships, the introduction of alternative strategies often 
confuses instructionally naive students. Teachers should select the most generalizable, useful, 
and explicit strategies to teach their students—strategies that draw attention to the relationships 
among the mathematical skills and concepts being taught.
As mentioned previously, this text provides teachers with explicit instructional strategies to 
teach content expected to be taught in elementary and middle school classrooms. The strategies 
are translated into teaching procedures using teaching formats or scripts that provide specific

[p.4]
4 Part I Perspective
teacher wording, examples, and often error-correction procedures. Formats are designed so that 
teacher explanations are clear and unambiguous so teachers do not have to worry if the explana­
tion they provide one day is consistent with explanations they’ve given previously.
The teaching formats represent a carefully designed instructional sequence reflecting the 
gradual release of responsibility from teacher to student. Most of the formats consist of four parts: 
a structured board presentation, a structured worksheet presentation, a less structured worksheet 
presentation, and supervised practice. A characteristic of the formats is the use of frequent ques­
tioning that allows teachers to continuously check for student understanding and increases student 
engagement. This text provides links to teaching formats for the instructional strategies discussed 
in each chapter. In addition, some of the formats are accompanied by video demonstrations.
Preskills
As mentioned previously, instruction should be sequenced so that the requisite component skills of 
a strategy are taught before the entire strategy is introduced. The component skills, therefore, can 
be called preskills. For example, to solve a percent problem (What is 23% of 67?), the student must 
be able to (a) convert percent to a decimal (23% = .23), (b) solve multiplication problems with 
multi-digit factors (.23 × 67), and (c) place the decimal point correctly in the product (15.41).
67
× .23
201
134
15.41
The necessary preskills for many strategies may have been taught earlier or in previous 
grades. Nonetheless, to ensure that students have mastered the preskills before introducing a 
new instructional strategy, teachers should test students on those preskills. Each chapter in this 
text identifies critical preskills for the strategies presented so that teachers can design tests to 
determine whether the preskills have been mastered or must be taught.
Example Selection
Selecting examples involves constructing or choosing appropriate problems to be used during 
teaching demonstrations and student practice. Two guidelines are particularly helpful in assist­
ing teachers in selecting appropriate examples. The first example selection guideline is simply to 
include only problems that students can solve by using a strategy that has been explicitly taught. 
For example, if students have been taught a regrouping strategy for solving subtraction problems 
without zeros, but they have not yet been taught to solve problems with zeros, the teacher should 
not give them a problem such as 3,004 — 87. As mentioned previously, teaching students to 
rename in problems containing zeros requires additional instruction in specific preskills.
The second guideline is ultimately to include not only examples of the currently introduced 
type (introductory examples) but also examples of previously introduced problem types that are 
similar (discrimination examples). The purpose of including previously introduced problem types 
is to provide students with practice in determining when to apply the new strategy and when to 
apply previously taught strategies. For example, after students learn how to regroup from ones to 
tens in column addition, their practice examples should include problems that require regrouping 
and problems that do not. Working a set of discrimination problems encourages students to exam­
ine the problems more carefully to determine when to apply the regrouping strategy instead of 
reverting to the rote behavior of just “putting one on top of the tens column.” The importance of 
including discrimination examples cannot be overemphasized. Unless previously taught problem 
types are included, students will likely forget or misapply earlier taught strategies.
Practice and Review
Providing sufficient practice for initial mastery and adequate review for retention is an essential 
aspect of instructional design. Two guidelines are fundamental in helping teachers provide 
practice and review. First, teachers must provide massed practice (Dunlosky, Rawson, Marsh,

[p.5]
Chapter 1 Direct Instruction 5
Nathan, & Willingham, 2013) on an individual skill until mastery is reached. Students demon­
strate mastery on a particular skill when they can work problems accurately, fluently, and inde­
pendently. Following this guideline requires that teachers monitor their students carefully and 
frequently to determine if and when mastery has been achieved. If students have not mastered a 
skill in the time originally allotted, teachers will need to provide additional practice opportunities.
Second, teachers must provide systematic review of previously introduced skills. Once 
students have reached a specified level of mastery on a given skill, the teacher can gradually 
decrease the amount of practice on that skill. But practice should never entirely disappear. The 
skill should be reviewed systematically over time to ensure retention. Reviewing a skill system­
atically over time is called distributed practice. Distributed practice is a hallmark of all Direct 
Instruction programs.
The review of previously introduced skills requires deliberate planning, because many com­
mercial programs do not provide an opportunity for that review. Often, review is naturally pro­
vided because the newly taught skill serves as a component skill for a more advanced problem 
type. For example, as subtraction problems with regrouping are mastered, those problems are 
integrated into word problems, thereby providing practice on the component skill.
In Chapter 3 we illustrate how the instructional design features discussed in this chapter 
contribute to a framework for evaluating published mathematics programs.
INSTRUCTIONAL DELIVERY
Once teachers have planned their mathematics instruction using the five essential instructional 
design features discussed above, they need to integrate instructional delivery features into their 
teaching plans. While the instructional design focuses on what to teach, instructional delivery 
addresses issues of implementation, that is, how best to teach. Four features are included in this 
section on instructional delivery:
1. Progress monitoring
2. Presentation techniques
3. Error-correction procedures
4. Diagnosis and remediation
Progress Monitoring
A major goal of progress monitoring is to determine whether students have mastered the mate­
rial. A second goal of progress monitoring is to determine whether students are progressing at an 
optimal rate. One research-based approach to monitoring student progress that assists teachers 
in determining an optimal rate is curriculum-based measurement, or CBM (Fuchs, Fuchs, & 
Hamlett, 2015). CBM offers an alternative both to informal observations, which tend to lack 
consistency, and to achievement tests, which are administered too infrequently to help teachers 
make instructional decisions.
Shinn and Walker (2010) explain that CBM has two distinctive features that separate it 
from other curriculum-based assessments: First, the recommended CBM procedures are as reli­
able and valid as most standardized achievement tests; second, the procedures are designed to be 
administered frequently enough to provide teachers with ongoing performance data.
One of the strongest advantages of using CBM is that by monitoring progress frequently, 
teachers can identify and remedy problems by making instructional changes before students fall 
too far behind their peers. Likewise, teachers can use CBM data to accelerate instruction. The 
National Center for Intensive Intervention (NCII) offers educators online tools and resources to 
assist them in implementing progress monitoring.
Presentation Techniques
A major aspect of Direct Instruction involves attention to a group of teaching or presentation 
techniques. How skillfully a teacher presents instruction significantly affects both the student’s 
rate of learning and the student’s self-concept. The relationship between success and self-concept,

[p.6]
6 Part I Perspective
a primary tenet in the Direct Instruction approach to teaching, was articulated by Engelmann as 
long ago as 1969:
The sphere of self-confidence that can be programmed in the classroom has to do with the 
child’s ability to stick to his guns, to have confidence in what he has learned, and to approach 
school tasks with the understanding that he is smart and will succeed. For a child to maintain 
such an impression of himself, he must receive demonstrations that these descriptions of 
himself are valid. If he finds himself failing in school, displeasing the teacher, feeling unsure 
about what he has learned, he must reevaluate himself and perhaps conclude that he is not a 
complete success, (p. 68)
The presentation techniques addressed here capture those skills needed for effective 
teacher-directed group instruction. Several factors contribute to a successful teacher-directed 
lesson. For example, the length of a teacher’s explanation or demonstration affects the likeli­
hood that students will be attentive. Teachers should make explanations brief and concise. The 
more time the teacher spends talking, the fewer opportunities for student involvement. Teachers 
working with primary-grade and lower-performing students in the upper grades should structure 
their presentations so that students are required to answer frequent questions.
Because teachers cannot call on every individual student to answer each question, unison 
responses should be incorporated into the teacher-directed lessons. Unison responses ensure that 
all of the students in the classroom actively participate in the lesson. Two very specific presen­
tation skills promote effective use of unison responses: appropriate use of signals and pacing.
Signals A signal is a cue given by the teacher that tells students when to respond in unison. 
The effective use of signals allows participation by all students, not just the highest-performing 
students who, if allowed, tend to dominate the activity.
To signal a unison response, the teacher (a) gives directions, (b) provides a thinking pause, 
and (c) cues the response. For example, when presenting an addition fact task, the teacher might 
say, “Listen. Get ready to tell me the answer to this problem: 4 + 6.” After the directions comes 
the thinking pause. The duration of the thinking pause is determined by the length of time the 
lowest-performing student needs to figure out the answer. (If one student takes significantly 
longer to answer than the other students in the group, the teacher should consider providing 
extra individual practice for that student.) For easier questions (simple tasks involving review of 
previously taught skills), the thinking pause may be just a split second, while for more complex 
questions the thinking pause may last longer. Carefully controlling the duration of the thinking 
pause is a very important factor in maintaining student attention.
The final step in the signaling procedure is the actual cue to respond. A cue or signal 
to respond may be a clap, finger snap, hand drop, touch on the board, or any similar type of 
action. This procedure can be modified for use with most tasks. On tasks calling for a long 
thinking pause, the teacher would say, “Get ready” an instant before signaling. The purpose 
of the get-ready prompt is to let the students know when to expect the cue to respond. Since 
the length of thinking pauses varies with the difficulty of the question, a prompt is needed; 
students may not know when to respond following a pause. Therefore, to elicit a group 
response in which each student has an equal opportunity to respond, the cue “Get ready” is 
given. An auditory signal (snap, clap, etc.) is necessary for teacher-directed worksheet tasks, 
since students are looking at their worksheets and cannot see a silent hand signal from the 
teacher.
The essential feature of a good signal is its clarity. The signal must be given so that students 
know exactly when they are expected to respond. If a signal is not clear, students cannot respond 
in unison. The teacher can use the student responses to evaluate the clarity of her signals. A 
repeated failure to respond together usually indicates that the signals are unclear or that the 
teacher has not provided adequate thinking time.
Giving individual turns (also called individual tests) is an essential part of any instructional 
activity in which students are asked to respond in unison. Using only unison responses, a teacher 
can never be absolutely certain whether each student has produced a correct response indepen­
dent from the responses of nearby students. Giving individual turns helps teachers verify that all 
students are participating appropriately in the activity.

[p.7]
Chapter ! Direct Instruction 7
g‰ Format 5.12:
Expanded Notation
Watch for Tristan's use of clear 
signals and lively pacing.
The teacher should give individual tests only after all the students in the group appear to 
be answering correctly during unison practice. Calling on a student who has not had enough 
practice to master the task may needlessly embarrass the student in front of his peers. Since indi­
vidual tests are time-consuming, they should not be given to every student after every task. As a 
general rule, turns should be given to all lower-performing students each time a new or difficult 
task is presented. Higher-performing students, on the other hand, can be tested less often.
Pacing Anyone who has observed young children watching TV shows or playing video games 
can attest to the role that pacing plays in maintaining attention. Teachers should be familiar 
enough with their material to present it in a lively, animated manner and without hesitation. 
Teachers who are well practiced with their instructional materials not only can teach at a livelier 
pace but also can focus their attention more fully on student performance.
Throughout this text, we have included videos of teaching demonstrations to illustrate 
instructional delivery skills. For each video, we have identified a “watch-for” that highlights the 
implementation of a specific presentation technique. For example, for the following video, note 
that the watch-for calls attention to Tristan’s use of signals and pacing.
Error-Correction Procedures
The first step in correcting errors made by students during group instruction is to determine the 
cause of the error. Teachers must decide if the error resulted from inattentiveness or from a lack 
of knowledge. Teachers can determine whether student errors were caused by inattentiveness by 
checking where the students were looking or what the students were doing when the question 
was asked.
Teachers should correct students who respond late or don’t respond at all during tasks 
requiring unison responding. For these errors teachers should inform the students that because 
not all students responded (or because some students failed to respond on signal), they have to 
repeat the task. Teachers should not direct any attention to the students who made the errors but 
should praise students who performed well and attended to the task.
Most error corrections follow a three-step procedure of model, test, and delayed test. If 
an error occurs when the teacher is presenting a strategy, the teacher would model the correct 
response or ask leading questions from the strategy so that students can generate the correct 
response. Next, the teacher would test the students by presenting the same task again—this 
time providing no assistance. The teacher then would return to the beginning of the original 
task and present the entire task again, the delayed test. The function of a delayed test is to 
check whether the student remembers the correct responses when starting from the beginning 
of the task.
Specific recommendations are outlined in each chapter for corrections of errors students 
are likely to make for a given topic. Specific teacher wording often can be found in the teaching 
formats provided within each chapter along with additional recommendations to ensure that the 
corrections are effective.
Diagnosis and Remediation
Diagnosis is determining the cause of a pattern of errors; remediation is the process of reteaching 
the skill. Diagnosis and remediation, as used in this text, are not the same as a simple error 
correction. An error correction immediately follows the mistake a student makes during teacher- 
directed instruction and requires minimal diagnosis because the teacher knows exactly what 
question the student missed.
A diagnosis, on the other hand, consists primarily of an analysis of the errors students make 
on independent work. The first decision to make in diagnosing errors is determining whether the 
errors are “can’t-do” or “won’t-do” problems. Won’t-do problems occur when students have 
the necessary skills but are careless, do not complete their work, or are inattentive. A diagnosis 
of won’t-do errors requires a remediation that focuses on increasing student motivation. A diag­
nosis of can’t-do problems requires a remediation that focuses on the student’s confusion or 
skill deficit.

[p.8]
8 Part I Perspective
The teacher diagnoses can’t-do errors by examining the missed problems on worksheets 
and/or by interviewing the students about how they worked the problems they missed. The 
following basic steps apply to diagnosing and remedying errors on most types of problems:
1. Diagnosis: Analyze worksheet errors and hypothesize what the cause of the errors might be. 
2. Confirmation: Interview the student to determine the cause of the errors if it is not obvious.
3, Remediation: Provide re teaching through board and/or worksheet presentations.
4. Assess: Test the student on a set of problems similar to the ones on which the original errors
were made.
An error usually is of three basic types: a fact error, a component-skill error, or a strategy 
error. Students often miss problems only because they don’t know their basic math facts. 
Basic facts are the addition and multiplication facts formed by adding or multiplying any two 
single-digit numbers and their subtraction and division corollaries.
Component skills are previously taught skills that are integrated as steps in a lengthier 
problem-solving strategy. Below is an example of an addition problem with renaming that a 
student missed due to a component-skill error:
2
67
+25
1
Note that in the incorrectly solved problem, the student knew to rename but did not know 
the component skill related to place value for renaming appropriately (12 equals 1 ten and 
2 ones). To remedy this component-skill error, the teacher would present instruction only on 
the component skill of expanded notation. Once the student mastered the component skill, the 
teacher would give students addition problems similar to the one originally missed.
A strategy error occurs when the student demonstrates that she does not know the sequence 
of steps required to solve the particular type of problem. In the following example, the stu­
dent subtracts the denominator from the numerator when instructed to convert an improper frac­
tion to a mixed number, indicating that the student does not have a viable strategy for reducing 
improper fractions. To remedy this problem, the teacher must teach the entire strategy of rewrit­
ing fractions to the student.
The diagnosis and remediation procedures recommended here are designed to increase 
instructional efficiency by helping teachers determine exactly how much additional teaching 
is necessary to bring students to mastery. If a teacher determines that student errors are due to 
deficient math fact knowledge, it is unnecessary to reteach lengthy problem-solving strategies. 
Similarly, if an error pattern reflected in a student’s independent work is related to a single 
component skill, then the teacher would reteach only that skill and not the entire instructional 
strategy. These diagnosis and remediation procedures can save teachers valuable instructional 
time by focusing on only those skills that require remediation.
INSTRUCTIONAL LANGUAGE
Attention to the need for instruction in discipline-based language has recently been extended to 
the area of mathematics as evidenced by the CCSSM. Mathematical language practices required 
by the CCSSM include engaging students in mathematical reasoning, developing viable argu­
ments, and critiquing the reasoning of others—high expectations for math students and their 
teachers. These higher-level language skills require that students understand basic mathematics 
concepts and are able to use appropriate mathematics vocabulary.
Attention to language has always been fundamental to Direct Instruction teaching (Engelmann, 
Carnine, & Steely, 1991). For example, in a first-grade mathematics class asking students if 
“3 is fewer than 5” may be problematic if students were taught the concept of “less than” and

[p.9]
Chapter 1 Direct Instruction 9
not the term “fewer.” Consistency in language contributes to clarity of instruction, and that clar­
ity of instruction is especially important for English language learners and students with math 
disabilities.
Sequencing Guidelines Applied to Language Instruction
The three sequencing guidelines discussed earlier (see Sequence of Skills and Concepts) are 
particularly relevant to a discussion of mathematics language. Below are three examples of the 
application of these guidelines to the math language instruction.
Teach Preskills of a Strategy Before the Strategy Teachers should consider what 
vocabulary is necessary to teach prior to teaching a concept and what vocabulary can be taught 
after the concept is introduced. Vocabulary terms that appear in the teaching formats should be 
taught prior to the introduction of the format. For example, in teaching the equality rule—“we 
must end with the same number on this side and the other side of the equal”—the terms “end 
with,” “side,” “equal,” “ same,” and “other” are used. Therefore, the meaning of these terms 
should be taught prior to the introduction of the equality rule.
Teach Easy Skills Before More Difficult Ones Although precise terminology is critical 
to mathematics, it is not necessary to teach precise, mathematically correct definitions initially; 
rather it is important to provide students with the language that will permit them to take part 
in math instruction. For example, the following definition for the area of a rectangle, although 
correct, contains difficult vocabulary concepts and initially is not very useful to students: “To 
find the area of a rectangle, multiply the length times the width resulting in an answer of square 
units.” In contrast, applying the guideline of “easy before more difficult,” we recommend intro­
ducing the area of a rectangle as “the number of squares it takes to cover the rectangle.” Using 
student-friendly math vocabulary, appropriate to students’ age and skill level, results in clear 
communication and promotes understanding.
Separate the Introduction of Information or Strategies That Are Likely to Be 
Confused The third sequencing guideline emphasizes separating confusing content. Teaching 
the concept first and later attaching more precise terminology to the concept reduces possible con­
fusion. For example, teaching students the concepts of fractions using the more student-friendly 
terms “top numeral” and “bottom numeral” (rather than “numerator” and “denominator”) allows 
students to focus on the concept rather than on the new terminology. The application of this 
guideline prevents most students from confusing the two parts of a fraction.
While teaching students mathematics language concepts is critical to mathematics profi­
ciency, it is beyond the scope of this book to provide detailed instructional recommendations 
for all math-related vocabulary. Teachers can find more information on how to teach specific 
vocabulary in Direct Instruction Reading (Carnine, Silbert, Kame’enui, Slocum, & Travers, 
2017). In this text, we address mathematics language by including an online glossary for teach­
ers, presenting specific instructional procedures for teaching critical concepts, and ensuring that 
all teaching formats adhere to the instructional design guidelines outlined above.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. What are the areas that comprise mathematical proficiency according to the National Research 
Council?
2. Outline the essential features of instructional design.
3. Describe the four features of instructional delivery characteristic of Direct Instruction.
4. Describe how the Direct Instruction sequencing guidelines are applied to mathematical language.