[p.443]
Chapter
Geometry
With Don Crawford
LEARNING OUTCOMES
17.1 Describe the scope of concepts that should be included in teaching geometry.
17.2 Describe the role language plays in the development of conceptual 
understanding of geometry.
17.3 Explain how nonexamples are used to teach students to identify and define 
geometric shapes.
17.4 Discuss the rationale for the formulas used to teach students to calculate area 
and volume.
17.5 Discuss the importance of modeling when teaching students to measure or 
construct figures using tools.
17.6 Outline the facts about angles and lines that are prerequisites for more 
advanced geometry.
17.7 Describe the general diagnosis and remediation procedures for addressing 
errors in geometry.
SKILL HIERARCHY
• ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ . ∙
The geometry objectives discussed in this chapter fall into four major categories:
1. Identifying and defining various figures and concepts.
2. Calculating the measurements of a figure, such as determining perimeter, area, and 
circumference.
3. Using tools, such as a compass or protractor, to construct figures.
4. Using logic in working with angles and lines.
An outline of the specific geometry skills discussed in this chapter can be found in the Instruc­
tional Sequence and Assessment Chart. Next to most of the geometry objectives in this chart are 
asterisks. These asterisks correspond to the four categories above. One asterisk indicates that the 
objective falls under the category “Identifying and Defining Geometric Figures and Concepts.” 
Two asterisks next to an objective indicate that the objective falls under “Calculating Measure­
ments of Geometric Figures.” Three asterisks next to an objective indicate that the objective falls 
under “Measuring and Constructing Geometric Figures Using Tools.” Four asterisks next to an 
objective indicate that the objective fall under “Using Logic in Working with Angles and Lines.”

[p.444]
444 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
K Identify circle* Mark each circle with X.
K Identify rectangle* Mark each rectangle with X.
K Identify triangle* Mark each triangle with X.
K Identify square* Mark each square with X.
K Identify interior of closed figure* Tell me when I touch the interior of this figure.
K Identify exterior of closed figure* Tell me when I touch the exterior of this figure.
1 Identify cube*
1
Mark each cube with X.
Mark each sphere with X.Identify sphere
1 Identify cone* Mark each cone with X.
2 Identify the diameter of a circle* What is a diameter? Put X on each line that is the diameter 
of a circle.

[p.445]
Chapter 17 Geometry 445
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
2 Identify the following polygons:*
Pentagon Draw a P over the pentagon.
Hexagon Draw an H over the hexagon
Octagon Draw an 0 over the octagon.
3 Find the perimeter** Find the perimeter of this square.
3 Find the area of rectangle or
4"
4"
Find the area of this rectangle.
square**
3"
6"
Draw a line segment**
3 Identify parallel lines* Circle each group of parallel lines.
11 ∕∖ — —
3 Identify perpendicular lines*
II ∕∖ — —
Circle each group of perpendicular lines.
n r
3 Identify a parallelogram Circle each parallelogram.
∖____∖ /____ ∖ 1____ / ∖____ i
Draw the line segment CD.
C
A
B
D
continued

[p.446]
446 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
4 Define/identify radius* What is the radius of a circle? Mark each line that is a 
radius with X.
© © o©
4 Using a compass, construct a cir­
cle when given a radius***
Draw a circle that has a radius of 2 inches. Use a compass.
4 Label angles* For each example, write the name of the angle.
A
B<
rv ___________
τ s 
fj∖ ____________ 
f e
4 Define degree/measure angles 
using a protractor**
Measure each of the following angles.
∖____ > t____.
4 Construct angles using a 
protractor***
Construct the following angles.
90o__________ _
450___________
4 Define/identify right angle* What is a right angle? Circle each right angle.
4 Define/identify acute angle* What is an acute angle? Circle each acute angle.
4 Define/identify obtuse angle* What is an obtuse angle? Circle each obtuse angle.
4 Define/identify right triangle* What is a right triangle? Circle each right triangle.

[p.447]
Chapter 17 Geometry 447
Grade Level Problem Type
4 Define/identify equilateral
triangle*
Performance Indicator
What is an equilateral triangle? Circle each equilateral triangle.
4 Define/identify isosceles triangle* What is an isosceles triangle? Circle each isosceles triangle.
4 Define/identify scalene triangle* What is a scalene triangle? Circle each scalene triangle.
4 Find the perimeter of various
polygons**
Find the perimeter of this figure.
4 State the degrees in an angle,
given examples of a right angle, 
a straight angle, or a full circle*
5 Find the volume of a box (rect­
angular prism) using the for­
mula**:
Volume = Area of base × 
height
6 Find the area of a triangle using 
the equation**
a _ base × height
How many degrees in AA, AB, and AC?
Find the volume of a box whose base is 5 inches long and 7 inches 
wide and whose height is 4 inches.
Find the area of this triangle.
continued

[p.448]
448 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
INSTRUCTIONAL SEQUENCE AND ASSESSMENT CHART (continued)
Grade Level Problem Type Performance Indicator
6 Find the area of a parallelogram 
using the equation**
A = base ∙ height
Find the area of this parallelogram.
5 cm/ : 4 cm /
Z___ b_______/
6 cm
7 Find value of unknown 
component angles using facts 
about angles****
Find the value of ZB if ZA is one-third of a full circle.
A
7 Identify corresponding angles 
and that they are equal*
Identify which angle is equal to ZA in this diagram.
7 Identify opposite angles and that
they are equal*
7 Use knowledge of facts about
angles to compute values of 
angles in a complex 
diagram****
Use equation π (pi) ∙ D = C to 
find π(pi), D, or C**
A
Identify which angle is equal to ZA in this diagram.
If ZA is equal to one-fifth of a circle, compute the value of angles B, C, 
and D in this diagram.
Find the circumference of circle A and the diameter of circle B.

[p.449]
Chapter 17 Geometry 449
Grade Level
7
Problem Type
Use the equation A = π∙r∙r 
to find area of a circle given the 
radius or the diameter**
Performance Indicator
7 Find the surface area of boxes
(rectangular prisms)**
Find the area of the circle.
7 Find the surface area of 
rectangular pyramid**
Find the surface area of a 
triangular pyramid**
Find the surface area of this pyramid with a triangular base.
continued

[p.450]
450 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
CONCEPTUAL UNDERSTANDING
Geometric shapes such as circle, triangle, and square, often are introduced in kindergarten as 
vocabulary concepts during early language instruction. These language concepts are extended as 
students learn more geometry-related content. Eventually, students work with precise definitions 
of these geometric concepts that involve more complex mathematical language (a right triangle 
is a closed figure with three sides and a 90-degree angle).
Promoting conceptual understanding requires teachers to highlight the relationships among 
geometric concepts. Rather than only teaching students to memorize that pi equals 3.14, the 
concept of pi is taught by teaching students the relationship between the diameter and the 
circumference of a circle. By providing students with several examples of different-sized 
circles, each with their diameter and circumference identified, teachers can have students use 
calculators to find that the circumference divided by the diameter always yields pi, or 3.14. 
Additionally, visual representations are critical to providing conceptual understanding in geom­
etry. The formats in this text for finding the area of rectangles, triangles, complex figures, and 
volume all include visual representations that promote conceptual understanding.
IDENTIFYING AND DEFINING GEOMETRIC FIGURES
AND CONCEPTS
Φ∙∙∙∙∙*∙
Table 17.1 lists many of the figures and relationships taught in elementary and middle school 
geometry units. The table shows the relationships among various figures and concepts. However, 
it is not intended to imply an order for introducing skills. A suggested order for introducing 
skills appears in the Instructional Sequence and Assessment Chart.

[p.451]
Chapter 17 Geometry 451
As mentioned earlier, teaching students to identify new figures and concepts is a form of 
vocabulary teaching. Three basic methods of vocabulary instruction are typically used to teach 
concepts: (a) examples only, (b) synonyms, and (c) definitions. A more detailed discussion of 
these methods of teaching vocabulary can be found in Direct Instruction Reading (2016). The 
examples-only method is used to present vocabulary terms and concepts that cannot be read­
ily explained by using a synonym or definition. In teaching vocabulary through examples, the 
teacher constructs a set of examples, half of which are of the concept (positive examples) and 
half of which are of a similar but different concept (nonexamples). The example set must be care­
fully designed to show the range of positive examples and rule out possible misinterpretations.
TABLE 17-1 Figures and Relationships Taught in Elementary and Middle School Geometry Units
Figure/Relationship Description Example
Open Figures
Line segment The shortest distance between two points (Note: A line extends e--~-j∙
infinitely in space in two directions.)
Ray A line beginning at a point and extending infinitely into space
Angle Formed by two rays both of which have the same end point,
which is called the vertex
Right angle Measures 90o
Obtuse angle Measures more than 90o and less than 180o
Acute angle Measures more than 0o and less than 90o
Straight angle Measures 180o ◄----------►
Closed Figures
Polygons Simple (no crossed lines) closed figures bound by line segments
Triangles Three-sided figures
Equilateral All sides measure the same length
Right Contains one right angle
Isosceles Two sides of equal length
Scalene No two sides are of the same length
Quadrilaterals Four-sided figures
Rectangle Four right angles, two pairs of sides with equal lengths
Square Four equal sides, four right angles
Parallelogram Two pairs of parallel lines 4
Rhombus Parallelogram having two adjacent sides congruent
/ /1
Trapezoid No right angles, one pair of nonparallel lines
L_ ∖3
5
Additional polygons
Pentagon Five-sided figure
Hexagon Six-sided figure
Octagon Eight-sided figure
continued

[p.452]
452 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
TABLE 17.1 (continued)
Figure/Relationship Description Example
Curved Figures
Ovals
Circles
Center Midpoint of circle
Radius Line segment extending from midpoint to edge
Diameter Line that divides the circle in half
Three-Dimensional Shapes
Cube
Pyramid
Cone
Cylinder
Sphere
Line Relationships
Perpendicular lines Lines that intersect to form a 90o angle
Parallel lines Lines that exist beside each other without intersecting
Figure Relationships
Similarity Having the same shape
Congruence Having the same shape and size
Symmetry A figure can be folded along a line and the two parts coincide
For example, when ovals are introduced, a variety of ovals should be presented to demonstrate 
the range of figures called ovals:
The nonexamples used when teaching ovals should include circles so that the students will not 
misidentify circles as ovals. As the examples are presented, the teacher points to each example, 
saying, “This is an oval” or “This is not an oval,” and then she tests the students by asking, “Is 
this an oval?”
Teaching vocabulary through synonyms involves explaining a new term by using a word 
or phrase already known to the students. For example, the word “interior” may be explained 
as “inside.” Teaching vocabulary through definitions, on the other hand, involves a longer

[p.453]
Chapter 17 Geometry 453
explanation with more detailed vocabulary. For example, a pentagon may be defined as 
“a closed figure having five straight sides.” Following the presentation of either a synonym or 
a definition, the teacher presents a set of positive and negative examples (i.e., nonexamples), 
asking, “Is this a?”
The synonym or definition selected need not meet all the requirements of a formal defini­
tion of the concept but should be worded in student-friendly language. In fact, a teacher initially 
may choose a simplified definition that may not be technically correct but will help the students 
master the concept (a rectangle has four sides and four square corners). More sophisticated defi­
nitions then can be introduced in later grades.
Format 17.1: Identification/Definition—Triangle illustrates the procedure for teaching 
basic definitions. In Part A, the teacher models the definition. The teacher then tests students on 
applying the definition to a set of examples and nonexamples. Note that students not only are 
asked to identify which pictures are triangles but also are asked to explain how they know that 
the figure is a triangle using the definition they were taught. Part B is a less structured worksheet 
exercise in which students must apply the information they have learned by discriminating trian­
gles from other geometric shapes.
Worksheets used for independent practice should contain two distinct sections. One section 
should test the application of the new definition, and the other should review concepts taught 
previously. The cumulative review represented by the second section serves two important func­
tions. First, it helps prevent students from forgetting previously taught concepts. Second, it helps 
provide the discrimination practice needed when similar figures are presented. Student perfor­
mance on the review sections of these worksheets can inform teachers when a new definition or 
concept can be introduced. Generally, new information should not be introduced until students 
demonstrate mastery on previously introduced information. In addition to worksheet review, 
extra practice can be incorporated into the classroom routines in the form of games and indepen­
dent activities at classroom learning centers.
Prior to discussing the second major category in this chapter, geometric calculations, it is 
important to reaffirm the critical role that language concepts play in geometry instruction. For 
example, calculating the circumference of a circle is relatively simple if students understand 
the concepts: radius, diameter, circumference, and π(pi). Once students develop conceptual 
understanding for the concepts, they can more easily be taught to apply the equation “diameter 
times ττ(pi) equals circumference.”
CALCULATING PERIMETER, AREA, AND VOLUME 
♦ ∙ ............
Students in elementary and middle school typically learn how to find (a) the perimeter of poly­
gons; (b) the area of squares, triangles, rectangles, parallelograms, circles, and complex figures; 
(c) the surface area of rectangular prisms (boxes), rectangular pyramids, triangular pyramids; 
and (d) the volume of rectangular prisms, triangular pyramids, and rectangular pyramids. Rec­
ommendations regarding when to introduce each measurement skill can be found in the Instruc­
tional Sequence and Assessment Chart.
Perimeter and Area
In teaching the students to find the perimeter of a closed figure, the teacher defines perime­
ter and models adding the lengths of each side. After introducing the concept of perimeter, the 
teacher would present a structured worksheet exercise followed by independent practice.
Format 17.2: Finding the Area of Rectangles outlines how a teacher would most 
effectively teach the procedure for calculating the area of a rectangle. In Part A, the teacher 
illustrates the concept of area by showing how a rectangle may be divided into square units 
with horizontal and vertical lines drawn at the unit intervals. This visual representation is 
critical to establish the connection between what students know about multiplication (that 
one multiplies to determine the number of objects in groups of equal size) with the new skill 
of finding area. Note that the format uses a variety of common units such as inches, feet, 
yards, centimeters, and meters. Using different units enables students to generalize across 
problems.

[p.454]
454 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
FIGURE 17,*1 Sample measuring worksheet
3"
7"
a. What is the perimeter of this rectangle? ____
b. What is the area of this rectangle? 
The teacher conveys the meaning of the term “square unit” by referring to the illustrated 
squares. After presenting the illustration, the teacher gives a rule for determining the area (mul­
tiply the base times the height) and demonstrates its application, computing the area of sev­
eral rectangles and squares. The teacher emphasizes the need to express the answer in terms of 
square units (square inches, square feet, etc.).
Part B, the less structured board presentation, is used after students have been introduced to 
the concept of area. In the less structured board presentation, the teacher reviews the equation 
for finding the area of a rectangle. Students identify the measurement of the height and base of 
the rectangles and calculate the area. The less structured board presentation is followed by struc­
tured worksheet and less structured worksheet exercises.
A sample worksheet exercise that promotes the discrimination between perimeter and area 
appears in Figure 17.1. Exercises like these are important to help prevent students from confus­
ing perimeter and area.
A variety of equations can be used to teach area. In the format for finding area of a rectan­
gle, we recommend using “base times height.” This equation is better than “length times width” 
because it is more closely related to the equations for finding the areas of other figures. For 
example, the equation for finding the area of triangles is “base times height divided by two” (see 
Format 17.3). If the area of rectangles has been taught as “base times height,” the relationship 
between the area of rectangles and triangles is easier for students to conceptualize.
Format 17.3: Finding the Area of Triangles includes a structured board presentation that 
explicitly demonstrates how the area of a rectangle (base times height) is related to the area of 
a triangle (bases times height divided by 2). This demonstration provides a sophisticated visual 
representation of the concept and is similar to the kinds of proofs students will have to construct 
in high school geometry.
The structured board presentation is followed by a less structured board presentation in 
which the teacher reviews with the students the formula for finding the area of a triangle. Stu­
dents identify the base and height of triangles drawn on the board and calculate the area. The 
structured worksheet presentation includes both triangles and rectangles. The teacher asks 
questions prompting the students to identify the figure and the formula for finding the area of 
each figure. The structured worksheet is followed by a less structured worksheet with minimal 
prompts.
Once students can calculate the area of both rectangles and triangles, they more easily 
can be taught how to find the area of complex figures—ones that have figures inside of them. 
This skill is needed to find the area of a wall that has a window or a door in it when painting 
a room. Students learn to find the area of the whole figure, find the area of the interior figure, 
and then subtract the area of the interior figure from the area of the whole figure. Format 17.4: 
Calculating the Area of Complex Figures provides the steps for the recommended strategy. 
Students should be very comfortable with finding the area of both rectangles and triangles prior 
to being introduced to finding the area of complex figures.
In Part A, the structured board presentation, the teacher introduces the steps in the strategy 
and then leads the students through calculating the area of the figures. Part B is a structured 
worksheet exercise that provides practice on a variety of examples to promote generalization of 
the strategy. Part C is a less structured worksheet similar to the one used in Part B, with fewer 
teacher prompts.
As previously noted, we recommend teaching the area of a rectangle as “base times height” 
because this equation allows for generalization to other shapes. Because of the unique properties 
of parallelograms, for example, length times width will not yield the correct area.

[p.455]
Chapter 17 Geometry 455
The structured board presentation in Format 17.5: Calculating the Area of Parallelograms 
includes a demonstration of why the equation works and how it is related to the equation for 
finding the area of rectangles. As in the previous formats, the structured board presentation is 
followed by a less structured board presentation that focuses on the application of the equation. 
The board presentations are followed by worksheet exercises in which the teacher guidance 
gradually fades.
Volume
Volume refers to the number of cubic units of space inside a three-dimensional shape. When 
teaching volume, we recommend using equations similar to the one used for calculating area. 
The equation “the area of the base times the height” can easily be applied to calculating vol­
ume for several other three-dimensional shapes. Figure 17.2 illustrates the relationship between 
seven traditional formulas for calculating volume and the more generalizable equations recom­
mended in this text. For example, once students know the equation for finding the area of a 
rectangle, they can calculate the volume of a rectangular prism. They calculate the area of the 
rectangular base and then multiply by the height of the prism. The same formula applies to cal­
culating the volume of triangular prisms and cylinders. Finally, students learn that they can find 
the volume of a solid object that comes to a point (cone or pyramid) by calculating the area of 
the base times the height divided by 3.
FIGURE 17.2 A comparison of seven formulas for calculating volume
Rectangular Prism Triangular Prism Cylinder
Generalizable Strategy
Conventional
Cone SpherePyramids
Triangular Pyramid Rectangular Pyramid
Generalizable Strategy B × jh 1 1 2B × —h B × —h B × —h
Conventional
v = volume, 1 = length, r =
-x1xw× h6
radius, w = width, B =
1 , 1 ,, 4 ,- × I × w × h - X π X r2 X h - X π × r
area of the base

[p.456]
456 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
In Format 17.6: Calculating the Volume of Boxes, a procedure similar to that for teaching 
the area of a rectangle, is used to teach students to determine the volume of a box. Introducing 
new concepts using familiar terms, such as box, is intended to reduce confusion. An important 
preskill for computing volume is multiplying three numbers. Students are taught to first multiply 
two of the numbers to find the area of the base and then multiply the product of those two num­
bers by the third, the height.
In Part A of the format, the teacher promotes understanding of the concept by using a visual 
representation illustrating how a box may be divided into cubic units. The teacher then demon­
strates how multiplying the area of the base by the height gives the number of cubic units in the 
figure. In Part B, the teacher applies the equation (area of the base times the height) to figures 
without first including the illustrations of the individual cubic units. Finally, the teacher must 
emphasize that answers are expressed in terms of cubic units.
MEASURING AND CONSTRUCTING FIGURES USING TOOLS
Measuring and constructing figures requires the use of tools such as a ruler, compass, and pro­
tractor. In order to teach students to use these tools, teachers must provide a clear model of using 
the tool correctly as well as sufficient, structured practice with the tools. For example, in mod­
eling the use of a compass, the teacher would emphasize the need to keep the compass upright 
when drawing a circle and not letting it slant.
Teaching students to measure the number of degrees in an angle requires teaching them to 
use a protractor. The teacher first models how to align (a) the base of the protractor and the base 
of the angle and (b) the vertex (point of the angle) with the center of the protractor base. The 
next step requires determining which row of numerals to read. As illustrated in Figure 17.3, 
protractors have two rows of numerals. If the baseline of the angle points to the right: 
the lower numerals are read. If the baseline of the angle points to the left, the top numerals are 
read:
The final step involves determining the number of degrees by noting the places at which 
the ray and the protractor intersect. In Figure 17.3, the intersection is at 70. Therefore, the 
angle is 70o.
FIGURE 17.3 Using a protractor
USING LOGIC IN WORKING WITH ANGLES AND LINES
*∙∙∙∙∙∙∙
Students can use a number of facts about angles and lines to work a variety of problems. These 
geometry facts serve as prerequisite skills for more advanced problem solving in geometry. 
These facts include: angles can be measured in degrees; there are 90 degrees in a “corner” or 
right angle; there are 360 degrees in a full circle; and there are 180 degrees in a half-circle or a 
straight angle.

[p.457]
Chapter 17 Geometry 457
Format 17.8
Finding the Values 
of Unknown Angles in 
Complex Diagrams
Watch how Kristen leads
students through applying the 
concepts of component and 
corresponding angles to find 
the measurements of unknown 
angles.
FIGURE *17.4 Component angles 
of a straight line
180-140 = 40
Students also need to know that the degrees in an angle that is divided into two parts can 
be shown as the big number in a number family and the two parts (or component angles) are 
the small numbers in that family. (See Chapter 6 for a discussion of number families.) To find 
the value of unknown component angles like those illustrated in Figure 17.4, students learn to 
construct a number family equation with the big number (total degrees) and the two smaller 
numbers (degrees of each component angle). Using number family logic, given any two values, 
students can compute the third.
Because students have learned that a straight angle is 180 degrees, they only need to know 
the measurement of one of the two component angles of the straight angle to be able to figure 
out the measurement of the other component angle. They construct a number family starting 
with 180 degrees (the big number) and the measurement of the known component angle (one of 
the small numbers). Using the number family rules (“When you have a big number, you subtract 
to find the missing number”) allows the students to generate an equation to solve for the value 
of the unknown component angle. They subtract the measurement of the known angle from 
180 degrees to obtain the measurement of the unknown component angle.
After they can solve one-step problems of this type, students can learn how to solve more 
complex problems like the following.
Find the value of angle B:
First, they find the value of one of the smaller angles by working from the information 
given. For the example above, if students are given information that Angle C is ∣ of a circle, 
students compute ∣ of 360 degrees (40 degrees) to find the value of that angle. In the second 
step, students find the value of the unknown second component angle (Angle B). Procedures 
for solving this type of two-step problem can be found in Format 17.7: Finding the Value 
of Unknown Component Angles. Note that the same procedure can be used to find unknown 
component angles of right angles or of a complete circle.
The more sophisticated skill of teaching students to find unknown angles in complex dia­
grams is introduced in Format 17.8: Finding the Values of Unknown Angles in Complex 
Diagrams. Prior to teaching this format, students need to be taught the concept of corresponding 
angles. This is best accomplished by using a series of examples and nonexamples.
The teacher would present a diagram like the one above and point out that angles A and C 
are corresponding angles and, by definition, of equal size. Angles B and D also are corresponding

[p.458]
458 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
angles. The teacher would then remind the students that Angles A and B are component angles 
and equal 180 degrees when added together. In the format, the measurement of one of the angles 
is always given. The concepts of component and corresponding angles can then be used to cal­
culate the measurements of the remaining three angles. Students can build on the logic in this 
type of problem when they are presented with more complex problems, for example, problems 
where a line intersects two parallel lines, creating eight angles of only two sizes. These more 
complex problems are valuable preparation for later work on geometric proofs.
DIAGNOSIS AND REMEDIATION
• ♦ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙ ∙
Students may demonstrate a variety of problems related to concepts in geometry. For example, 
they may confuse geometric shapes or the formulas for calculating measurements of various 
geometric shapes. Also, they may forget the facts associated with angles and lines causing them 
to miscalculate the values of related angles. Regardless of the specific error, the procedures for 
diagnosing and remediating errors remain consistent—teachers would identify the confusion 
causing the student error (diagnose), confirm by examining the student’s work or interview­
ing the student, review the critical content that addresses the student’s confusion, then provide 
additional practice examples until the student has demonstrated mastery. Figure 17.5 outlines 
recommended diagnosis and remediation procedures for three common geometry errors.
FIGURE 17.5 Diagnosis and remediation for common geometry errors
Remediation
Error Pattern Diagnosis Procedures Remediation Examples
Student consistently 
identifies □ as a 
triangle
220 degrees
Student confuses 
three and four­
sided figures. 
Students uses 
the incorrect 
number of 
degrees when 
calculating the 
value of a com­
ponent angle.
Student 
misreads the 
protractor by 
choosing the 
incorrect row 
of numerals to 
read.
Present Part A of 
Format 17.1.
Review geom­
etry facts such 
as, how many 
degrees are in 
a straight line 
and how many 
degrees are in 
a circle. Provide 
guided practice 
in calculating the 
values of compo­
nent angles.
Reteach the rule 
for which row of 
numerals to read 
on a protractor.
Provide examples similar to that included in
Format 17.7.
Provide a mix of examples including angles that 
are smaller than 90 degrees and angles that are 
larger than 90 degrees.
APPLY WHAT YOU LEARNED j
Click on the V to answer the questions online.
1. Describe how key concepts in geometry are sequenced.
2. Discuss how instructional language (e.g. vocabulary) for geometry concepts changes across 
grade levels.

[p.459]
Chapter 17 Geometry 459
3. Explain why students initially should be taught to determine the volume of a “box” rather than the 
more correct term “rectangular prism.”
4. Using Format 17.1 as a model, write a teaching format for introducing the concept of parallelogram.
5. Explain the rationale for teaching students a variation of base × height to calculate the area of rect­
angles, triangles, and parallelograms. Describe the teaching procedures that highlight how the three 
calculations are related.
6. Outline the three steps for finding the area of a complex figure such as a wall with a window in it.
7. Explain the rationale for teaching students to find the volume of boxes, cyEnders, and rectangular 
or triangular prisms by using a variation of area of base × height of the figure. Outline the teaching 
procedures that highlight how the calculations are related.
8. How would teachers use visual representations to help students conceptualize and calculate the 
volume of a rectangular prism?
9. Write a teaching format for teaching students to measure:
a. the perimeter of a rectangle,
b. the area of a square, and
c. the radius of a circle.
10. Outline the steps in teaching students to use a protractor. What examples and nonexamples should 
teachers be sure to include in their demonstration?
11. Construct a set of examples and nonexamples to use in teaching the concept of right angle.
12. A student consistently identifies squares as triangles. What would the teacher do?
Format 17.1
IDENTIFICATION/DEFINITION—TRIANGLE
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
(Present the following figures to the students.)
Λ∕∖ V □∣^ o□^=-
1. Listen to this definition: A triangle is a closed figure that has three 
straight sides. How many sides does a triangle have?
2. I'm going to point to some figures, and you tell me if they are triangles. 
(Point to Δ)
Is this a triangle?
How do you know?
(Point to the remaining figures in the sequence.)
Part B: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students a worksheet with problems like the ones below.)
Draw a circle around each triangle.
△ o 7 k∆ χ7o
3
Yes
It has three sides.
continued

[p.460]
460 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.1 (continued)
IDENTIFICATION/DEFINITION—TRIANGLE
TEACHER
Write the letter R over each rectangle.
Write the letter S over each square.
Write the letter T over each triangle.
Write the letter C over each circle.
△ ° Oθ tx
Look at problem a on your worksheet. Read the directions.
2. Touch the first figure. Is that a triangle?
So what are you going to do?
Do it.
3. Touch the next figure. Is that a triangle?
So what are you going to do?
4. (Have students complete the worksheet independently.)
STUDENTS
Draw a circle around each 
triangle.
Yes
Draw a circle around it.
No
Nothing
Format 17.2
FINDING THE AREA OF RECTANGLES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. The area of a figure such as a rectangle is the number of squares (such as 
square inches or square feet) it takes to cover the rectangle. Listen again. 
The area of a figure is the number of squares it takes to cover 
the figure.
2. What is the area of a figure? The number of squares it 
takes to cover the figure
4 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52
3 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39
2 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26
1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
3. You can find the number of squares by multiplying the number of 
squares in each row by the number of rows. The number of squares in 
each row tells us the base. How many squares across the base of this 
rectangle?
4. The number of rows tells us the height. How many rows high is this 
rectangle?
5. To find the area of this rectangle, we multiply the base by the height. 
What do we multiply to find the area?
13 squares
4 rows
Base × height

[p.461]
Chapter 17 Geometry 461
TEACHER________________________________________________________
6. So the equation for finding the area of a rectangle is base × height. 
What is the equation for finding the area of a rectangle?
7. We say the answer as square units. The rectangle above has a base of 
13 feet and a height of 4 feet. To find the area of this rectangle, what 
two numbers do we multiply?
8. Our answer will be in square units, in this case square feet. What kind 
of units will we label our answer?
9. So what is the area of this rectangle?
10. (Draw the following rectangle on the board:)
3
2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
11. The base of this rectangle is along the bottom. It is measured in feet. 
How many feet long is the base?
12. What is the height of the rectangle?
13. How many square feet in the area of this rectangle?
(Put this rectangle on the board:)
STUDENTS
Base × height
13 × 4
Square feet 
52 square feet
8 feet
3 feet
24 Square feet
2
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
14. This rectangle is measured in centimeters. What is the base of this 
rectangle?
15. What is the height of the rectangle?
16. What is the area of this rectangle?
Teaching the equation
1. The equation for the area of a rectangle can be written as
"Area of a rectangle = base × height."
(Write the following on the board:)
Area of a rectangle = base × height.
Read this equation.
2. Now let's see if you can remember this equation. (Erase board.) 
What is the equation for the area of a rectangle?
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. Let's find the area of some rectangles. What is the equation for the area 
of a rectangle? (Write on the board as students say the equation.)
2. Here is a rectangle.
10 centimeters
2 centimeters
20 Square centimeters
Area of a rectangle = 
base × height
Area of a rectangle = 
base × height
Area of rectangle = 
base × height
continued

[p.462]
462 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.2 (continued)
FINDING THE AREA OF RECTANGLES
TEACHER STUDENTS
(Draw this figure and label the following dimensions for base and height.)
3 m.
5 m.
3. What is the base of this rectangle?
4. What is the height of this rectangle?
5. What is the area of the rectangle?
6. (Repeat steps 3-5 by changing the dimensions on the board of the figure 
to the following:)
5 meters
3 meters
15 square meters
height: 4 cm
height: 8 feet
height: 3 inches 
height: 1 yard
base: 9 cm 
base:10 feet 
base: 4 inches 
base: 2 yards
Part C: Structured Worksheet
(Give students a worksheet with the following figures:)
2 m
12ft
D.
cm11
4 cm
1. State the equation for finding the area of a rectangle. Area of rectangle = 
base times height
2. Write the equation for finding the area of a rectangle. (Monitor student 
responses.)

[p.463]
Chapter 17 Geometry 463
TEACHER
3. Look at figure A. What is the base?
What is the height?
4. What is the area of figure A?
5. Look at figure B. What kind of figure is that?
6. So how do you find the area of figure B?
7. Find the area of each of these rectangles.
8. (Check student work.)
Part D: Less Structured Worksheets
(Give students a worksheet with the following rectangles.)
STUDENTS
5 meters
2 meters
10 square meters
Rectangle
Multiply base × height
1. Write the equation for finding the area of a rectangle.
2. Find the area of the rectangles on this worksheet.
3. (Monitor students as they work.)
Format 17.3
FINDING THE AREA OF TRIANGLES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Draw this rectangle on the board.) What is the equation for the 
area of a rectangle? Base × height
3ft
8ft
continued

[p.464]
464 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.3 (continued)
FINDING THE AREA OF TRIANGLES
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. What would you multiply to find the area of this rectangle? 
What is the area?
8 times 3
24 square feet
8ft
3. If I draw a line from one corner of the rectangle to the opposite 
corner, then I have divided the rectangle into how many parts?
4. I have made two triangles. The area of each triangle is one part out 
of two parts in the whole rectangle. How do we say that fraction?
5. If the area of each triangle is half of the rectangle, we can show the 
area of each triangle as the area of the rectangle divided by what 
number?
6. What is the equation for the area of a rectangle?
2
One half
2
Area of a rectangle = 
base × height
7. So we can find the area of the triangle the same way we find the 
area of the rectangle, just divided by two. (Write this on the board:)
base × heightArea of the Δ =--------- - ---------
Read this equation for finding the area of a triangle. The area of a triangle equals 
base times height divided by 
two.
(Draw another rectangle.)
8. Look at this rectangle. How would you find the area?
9. Watch how anywhere I draw a vertical line, I divided this rectangle 
into how many rectangles? (Draw a vertical line inside the rectangle:)
Multiply base × height
Two

[p.465]
Chapter 17 Geometry 465
TEACHER STUDENTS
I'll shade the left hand rectangle.
(Draw a diagonal line in each rectangle going from the outside 
bottom corner to the top of the vertical dividing line. Then put the 
letters A, B, C, D inside the resulting triangles:)
κ /
/ B
° s ' 
s ' Q
10. If I divide each of those rectangles with a line from corner to corner 
I have divided each rectangle into 2 triangles. The shaded left hand 
rectangle is divided into triangles A and B. The area of triangle A is 
what part of the area of the shaded left hand rectangle?
11. The area of triangle B is what part of the area of the shaded left 
hand rectangle?
12. The area of triangle C is what part of the area of the right hand 
rectangle?
13. The area of triangle D is what part of the area of the right hand 
rectangle?
(Draw heavier lines around triangles B and D.)
One-half
One-half
One-half
One-half
14. If I combine triangles B and D into one bigger triangle, the area 
of that combined triangle is what part of the area of the whole 
rectangle with which we started?
Yes, the area of this larger triangle is one half the area of the 
larger rectangle. So we can find the area of any triangle by 
multiplying the base times the height and then dividing that result 
by what number?
15. So what is the equation for finding the area of a triangle?
One-half
Two
Area of a triangle = base times 
height divided by 2
(Write on board as students state the equation:)
Area of the Δ = base x height
2
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. Let's find the area of some triangles. What is the equation for area 
of a triangle?
(Write on board as students say:)
r base × heightArea of the Δ =--------- ----------
Area of a triangle = base times 
height divided by 2
continued.

[p.466]
466 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.3 (continued)
FINDING THE AREA OF TRIANGLES
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. Here is a rectangle with a triangle inside.
(Draw this figure and label the following dimensions for base and 
height.)
5 m.
8 m.
3. What is the base of this rectangle and triangle?
4. What is the height of this rectangle and triangle?
5. What is the area of the whole rectangle?
6. How are you going to find the area of the triangle inside?
7. What is the area of the triangle inside?
8. (Repeat steps 3-7 by changing the dimensions on the board of the 
figure to the following:)
height: 3 inches 
height: 10 feet 
height: 4 cm 
height: 8 yards
base: 4 inches 
base: 12 feet 
base: 9 cm 
base:10 yards
8 meters
5 meters
40 square meters 
Divided by two 
20 square meters
Part C: Structured Worksheet
Students have a worksheet with the following figures.
4 mi.
4 cm.

[p.467]
Chapter 17 Geometry 467
TEACHER_______________________________________________
1. State the equation for finding the area of a triangle.
2. Write the equation for finding the area of a triangle.
3. Look at figure A. What is the base?
What is the height?
4. Find the area of that figure. (Pause.) 
What is the area of figure A?
5. Look at figure B. What kind of figure is that?
6. So how do you find the area of figure B?
7. Look at figure C. What kind of figure is that?
8. So how do find the area of figure C?
9. Find the area of each of these figures. Remember to use the 
appropriate equation for each figure.
10. (Check student work.)
Part D: Less structured worksheet
(Give students a worksheet like the following:)
5m. 10" 9m.
6 mi.
STUDENTS
Area of a triangle = base times 
height divided by 2.
base × heightArea of the Δ =-------------------
8 meters
7 meters
28 square meters
Rectangle
Base × height.
Triangle
Base × height divided by 2.
1. Write the equation for finding the area of a rectangle.
2. Write the equation for finding the area of a triangle.
Area □ = base × height.
, base × heightArea of the Δ =---------- ---------
3. Find the area of the figures on this worksheet. Be careful to use the 
appropriate equation for each figure.
4. (Check student work.)

[p.468]
468 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.4
CALCULATING THE AREA OF COMPLEX FIGURES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Draw the following figure on the board.)
The simplest way to find the area of a figure like this, with a missing 
part, is to calculate the area of the total figure, calculate the area of the 
missing part, then subtract the area of the missing part from the area 
of the total figure. What is first step to find the area of a figure with a 
hole in it?
2. What is the second step?
3. What is the third step?
4. To find the area of this figure with a missing part in it, what will we 
calculate first?
5. What is the equation for finding the area of a triangle? (Write this on 
the board as students say it.)
a z a b × hArea of a Δ = —-—
6. What is the base times the height for this triangle?
7. What is the area for the total triangle?
8. What is the second step to finding the area of this figure with a missing 
part?
9. The missing part in this figure is a rectangle with a base of 2 feet and 
a height of how many feet?
10. What is the area of the missing part in this figure?
11. What is the third step in finding the area of a figure with a missing 
part?
12. So we subtract the 6 square feet from what?
13. What's the area of this figure with a missing part?
Calculate the area of the 
total figure.
Calculate the area of the 
missing part.
Subtract the area of the 
missing part from the area 
of the total figure.
The area of the triangle
Base times height divided 
by two.
32
16 square feet
Calculate the area of the 
missing part
3 feet
6 square feet
Subtract the area of the 
missing part from the area 
of the total figure.
16 square feet
10 square feet

[p.469]
Chapter 17 Geometry 469
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part B: Structured Worksheet
When we calculate the area of figures like these, with missing parts, 
what is the first step?
2. What is the second step?
3. What is the third step?
4. So what do we calculate first?
5. Calculate that for the first figure. (Monitor student responses.)
6. What's the area of the total figure?
7. What do we calculate next?
8. Calculate that in the first figure.
9. What's the area of the missing part in the first figure?
10. What is the third step in finding the area of the first figure with a 
missing part?
11. Calculate that for the first figure.
12. What's the area of the first figure with the missing part?
13. (Do steps 4-12 with the second figure.)
Part C: Less Structured Worksheet
1. (Give students worksheets with problems like the following.)
Calculate the area of the 
total figure
Calculate the area of the 
missing part
Subtract the area of the 
missing part from the area 
of the total figure
The area of the total figure
54 square feet
The area of the missing part
12 square feet
Subtract the area of the 
missing part from the total 
area
42 square feet
continued

[p.470]
470 Part ∏l Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.4 (continued)
CALCULATING THE AREA OF COMPLEX FIGURES
TEACHER STUDENTS
When we calculate the area of figures with a missing part, what is the 
first step?
Calculate the area of the 
total figure.
2. What is the second step? Calculate the area of the 
missing part.
3. What is the third step? Subtract the area of the 
missing part from the area 
of the total figure.
4. Find the area of Figure A. (Pause.) What is the area of Figure A? 272 square yards
5. Find the area of Figure B. (Pause.) What is the area of Figure B? 800 square meters
Format 17.5
CALCULATING THE AREA OF PARALLELOGRAMS
1. (Draw this rectangle on the board.)
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
5 cm
9 cm
What is the equation for the area of a rectangle?
2. What do you multiply to find the area of this rectangle? 
What is the area?
3. Watch as I make this rectangle into a parallelogram with the same area. 
I take a triangle off of the left side and move it over to the right side.
Have I changed the area of the figure or have I just moved it? (Draw the 
following figure:)
Base x height
9 × 5
45 square centimeters
You just moved it.
4. What two numbers did you multiply to find the area of the rectangle?
5. To end up with the same area for the parallelogram, do I multiply the 
base of the parallelogram, 9 centimeters, by the height of 5 centimeters 
or by the length of 7 centimeters?
9 × 5
You multiply by the height 
of 5 cm.

[p.471]
Chapter 17 Geometry 471
TEACHER STUDENTS
Area of a parallelogram = 
the base × the height
6. Yes, the equation for the area of a parallelogram is base × height. 
What is the equation for the area of a parallelogram? (Write as the 
students say it: Area of a parallelogram = base × height.)
7. Look at this parallelogram. To find the area, you multiply the base of 
25 inches times what?
8. What is the equation for finding the area of a parallelogram?
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. Let's find the area of some parallelograms. What is the equation for the 
area of a parallelogram?
(Write on board as students say: A ZΞΞ7 = base × height)
The height of 10 inches
The base times the height
The area of a parallelogram 
is the base times height.
2. Here is a parallelogram.
(Draw this figure and label the following dimensions for base and height.)
3. What is the base of this parallelogram?
4. What is the height of this parallelogram?
5. What is the area of this parallelogram?
6. (Repeat steps 3-5 by changing the dimensions on the board of the figure
9 meters
3 meters
27 square meters
to the following.)
height: 5 inches side: 6 inches base: 8 inches
height: 10 feet side: 12 feet base: 20 feet
height: 8 cm side: 9 cm base: 10 cm
height: 2 yards side: 3 yards base:4 yards
continued

[p.472]
472 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.5 (continued)
CALCULATING THE AREA OF PARALLELOGRAMS
TEACHER
Part C: Structured Worksheet
(Give students a worksheet with the following figures.)
STUDENTS
1. State the equation for finding the area of a parallelogram.
2. Write the equation for finding the area of a parallelogram.
3. Look at figure A. What is the base?
What is the height?
4. Find the area of that figure.
What is the area of figure A?
5. Look at figure B. What kind of figure is that?
6. How do you find the area of figure B?
7. Look at figure C. What kind of figure is that?
8. So how do find the area of figure C?
9. Find the area of each of these figures.
10. (Check student work.)
The area of a parallelogram 
is base times height.
Area = base × height
10 meters
7 meters
70 square meters 
Parallelogram
Multiply the base × height. 
Rectangle
Multiply the base × height.

[p.473]
Chapter 17 Geometry 473
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part D: Less Structured Worksheet
(Give students a worksheet like the following.)
1. Write the equation for finding the area of a rectangle or a parallelogram.
2. Find the area of the figures on this worksheet.
3. (Check student work.)
Area = base × height
Format 17.6
CALCULATING THE VOLUME OF BOXES
TEACHER STUDENTS
Part A: Structured Board Presentation
1. (Draw the following cube on board.)
2. This is a cube. Each side of a cube is a square. Cubes are in the shape of 
dice. When you find how many cubes a box can hold, you are finding 
the volume of the box. When you find how many cubes a box can hold, 
what are you finding?
(Draw this box on the board.)
Volume
4 cm
continued

[p.474]
474 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.6 (continued)
CALCULATING THE VOLUME OF BOXES
TEACHER STUDENTS
3. The equation for the volume of a box is volume = area of the 
base × height of the box.
What is the equation for the volume of a box?
4. The base is the shaded area on the bottom. On this box, the base 
measures 2 cm by 4 cm. What is the area of the base of this box?
5. Yes, the area of the base is 8 square centimeters. Next we multiply by 
the height. What is the height of this box?
6. So what two numbers do we multiply to find the volume?
7. What is the volume of this box? Remember, the answer must be in cubic 
centimeters.
(Draw the following box on the board.)
Here is another box.
Volume = area of 
base × height of the box
8 square centimeters
3 centimeters
8 × 3
24 cubic centimeters
8. What is the equation for finding the volume of a box?
9. What two numbers do we multiply to find the area of the base of 
this box?
10. So what is the area of the base of this box, in square feet?
11. Once we have the area of the base, why do we multiply that by 3?
12. What is the volume in cubic feet of this box?
Part B: Less Structured Board Presentation
1. Let's find the volume of some boxes. What is the equation for the
volume of a box? (Write the equation on the board as students say it.)
Volume = area of the 
base × the height of the 
box
8 × 2
16 square feet
Because we have to 
multiply base × height 
of the box
48 cubic feet
Volume = area of the 
base times the height of 
the box

[p.475]
Chapter 17 Geometry 475
TEACHER STUDENTS
2. Here is a box. (Draw this figure and label the following dimensions for 
base and height.)
3. What is the area of the base of this box in square units?
4. What is the height of this box?
5. What is the volume of this box?
6. (Repeat steps 3-5 by changing the dimensions of the figure to the
9 square meters
3 meters
27 cubic meters
following.)
height: 5 inches side: 6 inches base: 7 inches
height: 10 feet side: 12 feet base: 11 feet
height: 4 cm side: 5 cm base: 6 cm
height: 2 yards side: 3 yards base: 4 yards
Format 17.7
FINDING THE VALUE OF UNKNOWN COMPONENT ANGLES
continued
TEACHER STUDENTS
1. (Draw the following figure on the board.)
B »
—----------------—
2. Angle A is the angle on one side of the straight line. Angle A is a half 
circle. How many degrees in a half circle?
3. Angle B and Angle C are parts, or components, of Angle A. So Angle B 
and Angle C added together would equal how many degrees?
4. So we can write a number sentence to show this. (Write the following 
number sentence on the board.)
Angle B + Angle C = 180 degrees
180 degrees
180 degrees

[p.476]
476 Part III Extended Concepts and Skills
Format 17.7 (continued)
FINDING THE VALUE OF UNKNOWN
COMPONENT ANGLES
TEACHER STUDENTS
5. If we know that Angle C is one-ninth of a circle, we can figure out how 
many degrees Angle C is, and we can figure out how many degrees 
Angle B is. How many degrees in a circle?
6. Angle C is one-ninth of a circle, so to find Angle C, we multiply 360 
degrees by one-ninth. That looks like this (Write on the board.)
1 360 360
9 X 1 ^ 9
360 degrees
7. Divide 9 into 360. (Pause.) What is 9 into 360, everybody?
8. So we know that Angle C is 40 degrees. Now our equation says: (Write 
the following number sentence on the board.)
Angle B + 40 = 180
40
9. How do we find Angle B? Do we add or subtract?
10. Raise your hand when you have found the answer. (Wait for students 
to calculate the answer.)
How many degrees is Angle B?
Subtract
140 degrees
Format 17.8
FINDING THE VALUES OF UNKNOWN ANGLES
IN COMPLEX DIAGRAMS(See Video)
TEACHER STUDENTS
U
1. (Draw the following on the board.)
2. These four angles are made by two intersecting lines. If we know the 
degrees for any one of the angles, we can figure out the degrees for any 
of the other angles. Angle A and Angle B are the two component parts of 
a straight line, or half a circle. So Angle A and B added together would be 
how many degrees? 180 degrees

[p.477]
Chapter 17 Geometry 477
TEACHER STUDENTS
3. We can write a number sentence to show this. (Write the following 
number sentence on the board.)
Angle A + Angle B = 180 degrees
4. If we know that Angle B is one-third of a circle, we can figure out how 
many degrees Angle B is and we can figure out how many degrees 
Angle A is. How many degrees in a circle? 360 degrees
5. Angle B is one-third of a circle, so to find Angle B, we multiply 
360 degrees by one-third. (Write the following on the board.) 
1 360 360
3 X 1 3
6. Divide 3 into 360. (Pause.) What is 3 into 360? 120
7. Now we know that Angle B is 120 degrees. Now the equation is Angle 
A + 120 = 180. (Write the equation on the board.)
8. Do we add or subtract to find Angle A? Subtract
9. How many degrees is Angle A? 60 degrees
10. What do we know about Angles A and C? They are equal.
11. So if Angle A is 60 degrees, what do we know about Angle C? It is 60 degrees.
12. And what do we know about Angles B and D? They are equal.
13. So how many degrees is Angle D? 120 degrees